A bliss in proof,-- and prov'd, a very woe;
A closet never pierc'd with crystal eyes--
A crow that flies in heaven's sweetest air.
A dateless lively heat, still to endure,
A dearer birth than this his love had brought,
A god in love, to whom I am confin'd.
A liquid prisoner pent in walls of glass,
A loss in love that touches me more nearly. 
A maid of Dian's this advantage found,
A man in hue all 'hues' in his controlling,
A quest of thoughts, all tenants to the heart;
A third, nor red nor white, had stol'n of both,
A thousand groans, but thinking on thy face,
A torment thrice three-fold thus to be cross'd:
A vengeful canker eat him up to death.
A woman's face with nature's own hand painted,
A woman's gentle heart, but not acquainted
Above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead?
Accuse me thus: that I have scanted all,
Admit impediments. Love is not love
Advantage on the kingdom of the shore,
After a thousand victories once foil'd,
After my death,--dear love, forget me quite,
Against confounding age's cruel knife,
Against my love shall be as I am now,
Against strange maladies a sovereign cure.
Against that time do I ensconce me here,
Against that time, if ever that time come,
Against that time when thou shalt strangely pass,
Against the stormy gusts of winter's day
Against the wrackful siege of battering days,
Against this coming end you should prepare,
Against thy reasons making no defence.
Ah! but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds,
Ah! do not, when my heart hath 'scap'd this sorrow,
Ah! if thou issueless shalt hap to die,
Ah! wherefore with infection should he live,
Ah! yet doth beauty like a dial-hand,
Alack! what poverty my Muse brings forth,
Alas! 'tis true, I have gone here and there,
Alas! why fearing of Time's tyranny,
All days are nights to see till I see thee,
All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood,
All losses are restor'd and sorrows end.
All men are bad and in their badness reign.
All men make faults, and even I in this,
All mine was thine, before thou hadst this more.
All these I better in one general best.
All this away, and me most wretchcd make.
All this the world well knows; yet none knows well
All tongues--the voice of souls--give thee that due,
Although I swear it to myself alone.
Although in me each part will be forgotten.
Although our undivided loves are one:
Although she knows my days are past the best,
Although thou steal thee all my poverty:
Am of my self, all tyrant, for thy sake?
Among a number one is reckon'd none:
An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling,
And age in love, loves not to have years told:
And all in war with Time for love of you,
And all my honest faith in thee is lost:
And all my soul, and all my every part;
And all the rest forgot for which he toil'd:
And all they foul that thy complexion lack.
And all things turns to fair that eyes can see!
And all those beauties whereof now he's king
And all those friends which I thought buried.
And almost thence my nature is subdu'd
And art made tongue-tied by authority,
And arts with thy sweet graces graced be;
And barren rage of death's eternal cold?
And beauty making beautiful old rime,
And beauty slander'd with a bastard shame:
And being frank she lends to those are free:
And both for my sake lay on me this cross:
And brass eternal slave to mortal rage;
And broils root out the work of masonry,
And brought to medicine a healthful state
And buds of marjoram had stol'n thy hair;
And burn the long-liv'd phoenix, in her blood;
And by a part of all thy glory live.
And by addition me of thee defeated,
And by and by clean starved for a look;
And by their verdict is determined
And captive good attending captain ill:
And chide thy beauty and thy straying youth,
And constant stars in them I read such art
And darkly bright, are bright in dark directed.
And Death once dead, there's no more dying then.
And delves the parallels in beauty's brow,
And die as fast as they see others grow;
And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field,
And do not drop in for an after-loss:
And do so, love; yet when they have devis'd,
And do whate'er thou wilt, swift-footed Time,
And dost him grace when clouds do blot the heaven:
And dumb presagers of my speaking breast,
And each doth good turns now unto the other:
And each, though enemies to either's reign,
And even thence thou wilt be stol'n I fear,
And every fair from fair sometime declines,
And every fair with his fair doth rehearse,
And every humour hath his adjunct pleasure,
And folly--doctor-like--controlling skill,
And for a woman wert thou first created;
And for my sake even so doth she abuse me,
And for myself mine own worth do define,
And for that riches where is my deserving?
And for that sorrow, which I then did feel,
And for the peace of you I hold such strife
And for they looked but with divining eyes,
And for this sin there is no remedy,
And fortify your self in your decay
And found it in thy cheek: he can afford
And found such fair assistance in my verse
And frantic-mad with evermore unrest;
And from the forlorn world his visage hide,
And gain by ill thrice more than I have spent.
And 'gainst myself a lawful plea commence:
And gilded honour shamefully misplac'd,
And given grace a double majesty.
And given to time your own dear-purchas'd right;
And gives thy pen both skill and argument.
And grew a seeting bath, which yet men prove
And hang more praise upon deceased I
And haply of our old acquaintance tell. 
And having climb'd the steep-up heavenly hill,
And having thee, of all men's pride I boast:
And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth
And heavily from woe to woe tell o'er
And heavy ignorance aloft to fly,
And her quietus is to render thee.
And him as for a map doth Nature store,
And his love-kindling fire did quickly steep
And husband nature's riches from expense;
And I, a tyrant, have no leisure taken
And I am still with them, and they with thee;
And I by this will be a gainer too;
And I my self am mortgag'd to thy will,
And I will comment upon that offence:
And in abundance addeth to his store;
And in fresh numbers number all your graces,
And in his thoughts of love doth share a part:
And in mine own love's strength seem to decay,
And in my madness might speak ill of thee;
And in my will no fair acceptance shine?
And in our faults by lies we flatter'd be.
And in some perfumes is there more delight
And in the praise thereof spends all his might,
And in themselves their pride lies buried,
And in this change is my invention spent,
And keep invention in a noted weed,
And keep my drooping eyelids open wide,
And kept unused the user so destroys it.
And lace itself with his society? 
And let that pine to aggravate thy store;
And life no longer than thy love will stay,
And like enough thou know'st thy estimate,
And like unlettered clerk still cry 'Amen'
And live no more to shame nor me nor you.
And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud.
And look upon myself, and curse my fate,
And losing her, my friend hath found that loss;
And made my self a motley to the view,
And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted,
And make me travel forth without my cloak,
And make the earth devour her own sweet brood;
And make time's spoils despised every where.
And many maiden gardens, yet unset,
And moan the expense of many a vanish'd sight:
And mock you with me after I am gone.
And more, much more, than in my verse can sit,
And my great mind most kingly drinks it up:
And my heart's right, thy inward love of heart.
And my next self thou harder hast engross'd:
And my sick Muse doth give an other place.
And needy nothing trimm'd in jollity,
And night doth nightly make grief's length seem stronger.
And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me.
And nothing 'gainst Time's scythe can make defence
And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow:
And of this book, this learning mayst thou taste. 
And often is his gold complexion dimm'd,
And on just proof surmise, accumulate;
And only herald to the gaudy spring,
And other strains of woe, which now seem woe,
And our dear love lose name of single one,
And patience, tame to sufferance, bide each check,
And peace proclaims olives of endless age.
And perspective it is best painter's art.
And place my merit in the eye of scorn,
And play the mother's part, kiss me, be kind;
And precious phrase by all the Muses fil'd.
And proud of many, lives upon his gains.
And prove thee virtuous, though thou art forsworn.
And purest faith unhappily forsworn,
And puts apparel on my tatter'd loving,
And rather make them born to our desire
And right perfection wrongfully disgrac'd,
And ruin'd love, when it is built anew,
And sable curls, all silvered o'er with white; 
And sav'd my life, saying 'not you'.
And says in him thy fair appearance lies.
And scarcely greet me with that sun, thine eye,
And seal'd false bonds of love as oft as mine,
And see the brave day sunk in hideous night;
And see thy blood warm when thou feel'st it cold.
And shalt by fortune once more re-survey
And, sick of welfare, found a kind of meetness
And simple truth miscall'd simplicity,
And situation with those dancing chips,
And so my patent back again is swerving.
And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth,
And so should you, to love things nothing worth.
And so the general of hot desire
And soon to you, as you to me, then tender'd
And steel dead seeming of his living hue?
And stops her pipe in growth of riper days:
And strength by limping sway disabled
And stretched metre of an antique song:
And such a counterpart shall fame his wit,
And sue a friend came debtor for my sake;
And suit thy pity like in every part.
And summer's green all girded up in sheaves,
And summer's lease hath all too short a date:
And swear that brightness doth not grace the day?
And sweets grown common lose their dear delight.
And take thou my oblation, poor but free,
And taught it thus anew to greet;
And tender churl mak'st waste in niggarding:
And that fresh blood which youngly thou bestow'st,
And that in guess they measure by thy deeds;
And that is this, and this with thee remains.
And that thou teachest how to make one twain,
And that unfair which fairly doth excel;
And that which governs me to go about
And that your love taught it this alchemy,
And the firm soil win of the watery main,
And the just pleasure lost, which is so deem'd
And the sad augurs mock their own presage;
And their gross painting might be better us'd
And then believe me, my love is as fair
And then thou lov'st me for my name is 'Will.'
And thence this slander, as I think, proceeds.
And there reigns Love, and all Love's loving parts,
And therefore art enforced to seek anew
And therefore from my face she turns my foes,
And therefore have I slept in your report,
And therefore mayst without attaint o'erlook
And therefore to your fair no painting set;
And they are rich and ransom all ill deeds.
And they shall live, and he in them still green.
And this my hand, against my self uprear,
And thither hied, a sad distemper'd guest,
And, thou away, the very birds are mute:
And thou in this shalt find thy monument,
And thou present'st a pure unstained prime.
And thou shalt find it merits not reproving;
And thou--all they--hast all the all of me.
And though they be outstripp'd by every pen,
And threescore year would make the world away.
And Time that gave doth now his gift confound.
And to be prais'd of ages yet to be.
And to be sure that is not false I swear,
And, to enlighten thee, gave eyes to blindness,
And to his palate doth prepare the cup:
And to his robbery had annex'd thy breath;
And to the most of praise add something more;
And to the painted banquet bids my heart;
And to this false plague are they now transferr'd.
And tongues to be, your being shall rehearse,
And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries,
And truly not the morning sun of heaven 
And under thee their poesy disperse.
And wear their brave state out of memory;
And weep afresh love's long since cancell'd woe,
And what is't but mine own when I praise thee?
And when a woman woos, what woman's son
And wherefore say not I that I am old?
And whether that my angel be turn'd fiend,
And will, thy soul knows, is admitted there;
And 'Will' to boot, and 'Will' in over-plus;
And with his presence grace impiety,
And with old woes new wail my dear time's waste:
And worse essays prov'd thee my best of love.
And would corrupt my saint to be a devil,
And yet by heaven, I think my love as rare,
And yet it may be said I loved her dearly;
And yet, love knows it is a greater grief
And yet methinks I have astronomy,
And yet this time removed was summer's time;
And yet thou wilt; for I, being pent in thee,
And yet to times in hope, my verse shall stand.
And you and love are still my argument;
And you but one, can every shadow lend.
And you in every blessed shape we know.
And you in Grecian tires are painted new: 
And you must live, drawn by your own sweet skill.
And your sweet semblance to some other give:
And your true rights be term'd a poet's rage
Angry that his prescriptions are not kept,
Anon permit the basest clouds to ride
Another time mine eye is my heart's guest,
Applying fears to hopes, and hopes to fears,
Are both with thee, wherever I abide;
Are vanishing, or vanished out of sight,
Are windows to my breast, where-through the sun
Art left the prey of every vulgar thief. 
As a decrepit father takes delight
As after sunset fadeth in the west;
As an unperfect actor on the stage,
As any mother's child, though not so bright
As any she belied with false compare.
As easy might I from my self depart
As every alien pen hath got my use
As fast as objects to his beams assemble?
As fast as thou shalt wane, so fast thou grow'st,
As from my soul which in thy breast doth lie:
As he takes from you, I engraft you new.
As high as learning, my rude ignorance.
As his triumphant prize. Proud of this pride,
As I all other in all worths surmount.
As I by yours, you've pass'd a hell of time;
As I, not for myself, but for thee will;
As if by some instinct the wretch did know
As I'll myself disgrace; knowing thy will,
As interest of the dead, which now appear
As on the finger of a throned queen
As Philomel in summer's front doth sing,
As soon as think the place where he would be.
As subject to Time's love or to Time's hate,
As tender nurse her babe from faring ill.
As testy sick men, when their deaths be near,
As the death-bed, whereon it must expire,
As the perfumed tincture of the roses.
As those gold candles fix'd in heaven's air:
As those two mourning eyes become thy face:
As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel;
As thou being mine, mine is thy good report.
As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report.
As thou goest onwards, still will pluck thee back,
As thus; mine eye's due is thy outward part,
As to behold desert a beggar born,
As, to prevent our maladies unseen,
As 'Truth and beauty shall together thrive,
As 'twixt a miser and his wealth is found.
As victors of my silence cannot boast;
As with your shadow I with these did play.
Askance and strangely; but, by all above,
At first the very worst of fortune's might;
At my abuses reckon up their own:
At random from the truth vainly express'd;
At such who, not born fair, no beauty lack,
At the wood's boldness by thee blushing stand!
Attending on his golden pilgrimage:
Authorizing thy trespass with compare,
Awakes my heart, to heart's and eye's delight.
Ay, fill it full with wills, and my will one.
Ay me! but yet thou mightst my seat forbear,
Bare ruin'd choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.
Be absent from thy walks; and in my tongue
Be anchor'd in the bay where all men ride,
Be, as thy presence is, gracious and kind,
Be it lawful I love thee, as thou lov'st those
Be not self-will'd, for thou art much too fair
Be scorn'd, like old men of less truth than tongue,
Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth
Be where you list, your charter is so strong
Be wise as thou art cruel; do not press
Bear thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart go wide.
Bearing the wanton burden of the prime,
Bearing thy heart, which I will keep so chary
Beated and chopp'd with tanned antiquity,
Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assail'd;
Beauty no pencil, beauty's truth to lay;
Beauty o'er-snowed and bareness every where:
Beauty's effect with beauty were bereft,
Because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb?
Because I would not dull you with my song.
Before, a joy propos'd; behind a dream.
Before the golden tresses of the dead,
Before these bastard signs of fair were born,
Beggar'd of blood to blush through lively veins?
Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse.
Being had, to triumph; being lacked, to hope.
Being your slave what should I do but tend,
Being your vassal, bound to stay your leisure!
Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan
Better becomes the grey cheeks of the east,
Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is took,
Beyond all date; even to eternity:
Blessed are you whose worthiness gives scope,
Book both my wilfulness and errors down,
Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard,
Both find each other, and I lose both twain,
Both grace and faults are lov'd of more and less:
Both truth and beauty on my love depends;
Bound for the prize of all too precious you,
Breathed forth the sound that said 'I hate',
Bring me within the level of your frown,
But, ah! thought kills me that I am not thought,
But all alone stands hugely politic, 
But as the marigold at the sun's eye,
But as the riper should by time decease,
But at my mistress' eye Love's brand new-fired, 
But be contented: when that fell arrest
But bears it out even to the edge of doom.
But beauty's waste hath in the world an end,
But being both from me, both to each friend,
But best is best, if never intermix'd'?
But day by night and night by day oppress'd,
But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer,
But do not so, I love thee in such sort,
But do not so; I love thee in such sort,
But do thy worst to steal thyself away,
But flowers distill'd, though they with winter meet,
But, for his theft, in pride of all his growth 
But, for their virtue only is their show,
But found no cure, the bath for my help lies
But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive,
But he that writes of you, if he can tell
But heaven in thy creation did decree
But heavy tears, badges of either's woe.
But here's the joy; my friend and I are one;
But hope of orphans, and unfather'd fruit;
But I forbid thee one most heinous crime:
But if that flower with base infection meet,
But if the while I think on thee, dear friend,
But if thou catch thy hope, turn back to me,
But if thou live, remember'd not to be,
But in the onset come: so shall I taste
But is profan'd, if not lives in disgrace.
But let your love even with my life decay;
But, like a sad slave, stay and think of nought
But love, for love, thus shall excuse my jade,--
But, love, hate on, for now I know thy mind,;
But makes antiquity for aye his page;
But mutual render, only me for thee.
But my five wits nor my five senses can
But no such roses see I in her cheeks;
But not to tell of good or evil luck,
But now is black beauty's successive heir,
But now my gracious numbers are decay'd,
But out! alack! he was but one hour mine,
But reckoning Time, whose million'd accidents
But rising at thy name doth point out thee,
But sad mortality o'ersways their power,
But shoot not at me in your waken'd hate;
But since he died and poets better prove,
But since she prick'd thee out for women's pleasure,
But since your worth--wide as the ocean is,--
But slave to slavery my sweet'st friend must be?
But sweet, or colour it had stol'n from thee.
But that I hope some good conceit of thine
But that is in my thought, whose love to you,
But that so much of earth and water wrought,
But that thou none lov'st is most evident:
But that wild music burthens every bough,
But that your trespass now becomes a fee;
But the defendant doth that plea deny,
But then begins a journey in my head
But then my friend's heart let my poor heart bail;
But thence I learn and find the lesson true,
But these particulars are not my measure,
But things remov'd that hidden in thee lie!
But those same tongues, that give thee so thine own,
But thou art all my art, and dost advance
But thou art twice forsworn, to me love swearing;
But thou contracted to thine own bright eyes,
But thou, to whom my jewels trifles are,
But thou wilt not, nor he will not be free,
But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
But 'tis my heart that loves what they despise,
But weep to have, that which it fears to lose.
But were some child of yours alive that time,
But what's so blessed-fair that fears no blot?
But when from highmost pitch, with weary car,
But when I sleep, in dreams they look on thee,
But when in thee time's furrows I behold,
But when my glass shows me myself indeed
But when she saw my woeful state,
But when your countenance fill'd up his line,
But wherefore do not you a mightier way
But wherefore says she not she is unjust? 
But why of two oaths' breach do I accuse thee, 
But why thy odour matcheth not thy show,
But yet be blam'd, if thou thy self deceivest
But you like none, none you, for constant heart.
But you shall shine more bright in these contents
Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross;
By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.
By chance, or nature's changing course untrimm'd: 
By children's eyes, her husband's shape in mind:
By looking on thee in the living day,
By new unfolding his imprison'd pride.
By oft predict that I in heaven find:
By praising him here who doth hence remain.
By seeing farther than the eye hath shown.
By self-example mayst thou be denied!
By that sweet ornament which truth doth give.
By their rank thoughts, my deeds must not be shown;
By those swift messengers return'd from thee,
By unions married, do offend thine ear,
By wilful taste of what thyself refusest.
Call'd to that audit by advis'd respects;
Calls back the lovely April of her prime;
Came there for cure and this by that I prove, 
Came tripping by; but in her maiden hand
Can bring him to his sweet up-locked treasure,
Can make you live your self in eyes of men.
Can yet the lease of my true love control, 
Cannot dispraise, but in a kind of praise;
Canst thou, O cruel! say I love thee not,
Cheered and checked even by the self-same sky,
Chiding that tongue that ever sweet
Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun,
Come daily to the banks, that when they see
Come in the rearward of a conquer'd woe;
Comes home again, on better judgement making.
Commanded by the motion of thine eyes?
Commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find
Compar'd with loss of thee, will not seem so.
Compare them with the bett'ring of the time,
Consum'd with that which it was nourish'd by.
Coral is far more red, than her lips red:
Could make me any summer's story tell,
Counting no old thing old, thou mine, I thine, 
Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crown'd,
Creating every bad a perfect best,
Creep in 'twixt vows, and change decrees of kings,
Cries to catch her whose busy care is bent
Crooked eclipses 'gainst his glory fight,
Crowning the present, doubting of the rest?
Cupid laid by his brand and fell asleep:
Darkening thy power to lend base subjects light?
Dear heart, forbear to glance thine eye aside:
Death's second self, that seals up all in rest. 
Delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee; 
Describe Adonis, and the counterfeit
Deserves the travail of a worthier pen;
Desire is death, which physic did except.
Desiring this man's art, and that man's scope,
Despite of wrinkles this thy golden time.
Devouring Time, blunt thou the lion's paws,
Die single and thine image dies with thee.
Die to themselves. Sweet roses do not so;
Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry?
Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee,
Distill'd from limbecks foul as hell within,
Divert strong minds to the course of altering things;
Do I envy those jacks that nimble leap,
Do I not think on thee, when I forgot
Do in consent shake hands to torture me,
Do not so much as my poor name rehearse;
Doing thee vantage, double-vantage me.
Dost hold Time's fickle glass, his fickle hour;
Dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken,
Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend?
Doth follow night, who like a fiend
Doth half that glory to the sober west,
Doth homage to his new-appearing sight,
Doth part his function and is partly blind,
Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name!
Doth teach that ease and that repose to say,
Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure;
Drawn after you, you pattern of all those.
Drink up the monarch's plague, this flattery?
Drugs poison him that so fell sick of you.
Dulling my lines, and doing me disgrace.
Duty so great, which wit so poor as mine
Each changing place with that which goes before,
Each trifle under truest bars to thrust,
Eat up thy charge? Is this thy body's end?
Either not assail'd, or victor being charg'd;
Enjoy'd no sooner but despised straight;
Entitled in thy parts, do crowned sit,
Ere beauty's dead fleece made another gay: 
Ere you were born was beauty's summer dead.
Eternal numbers to outlive long date.
Even as when first I hallow'd thy fair name.
Even for this, let us divided live,
Even in the eyes of all posterity
Even of five hundred courses of the sun,
Even so, being full of your ne'er-cloying sweetness,
Even so my sun one early morn did shine,
Even such a beauty as you master now.
Even that your pity is enough to cure me.
Even those that said I could not love you dearer:
Even to thy pure and most most loving breast.
Exceeded by the height of happier men.
Excuse not silence so, for't lies in thee
Excusing thy sins more than thy sins are;
Fair, kind, and true, have often liv'd alone,
'Fair, kind, and true,' is all my argument,
'Fair, kind, and true,' varying to other words;
Fairing the foul with Art's false borrowed face,
Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing,
Featur'd like him, like him with friends possess'd,
Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill,
Feeds on the rarities of nature's truth,
Feed'st thy light's flame with self-substantial fuel,
Find no determination; then you were
Finding the first conceit of love there bred,
Finding thy worth a limit past my praise;
Flatter the mountain tops with sovereign eye,
For all my vows are oaths but to misuse thee,
For all that beauty that doth cover thee,
For all the day they view things unrespected;
For as the sun is daily new and old,
For as you were when first your eye I ey'd,
For at a frown they in their glory die.
For beauty's pattern to succeeding men. 
For bending all my loving thoughts on thee,
For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure. 
For canker vice the sweetest buds doth love,
For compound sweet; forgoing simple savour,
For every vulgar paper to rehearse?
For fear of which, hear this thou age unbred:
For having traffic with thy self alone,
For how do I hold thee but by thy granting?
For I am shamed by that which I bring forth,
For I have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness,
For I have sworn thee fair, and thought thee bright,
For I have sworn thee fair; more perjur'd I,
For I impair not beauty being mute,
For I must ne'er love him whom thou dost hate.
For, if I should despair, I should grow mad,
For if it see the rud'st or gentlest sight,
For if you were by my unkindness shaken,
For it depends upon that love of thine. 
For it no form delivers to the heart
For men diseas'd; but I, my mistress' thrall,
For never-resting time leads summer on
For nimble thought can jump both sea and land,
For no man well of such a salve can speak,
For nothing hold me, so it please thee hold
For nothing this wide universe I call,
For precious friends hid in death's dateless night,
For shame! deny that thou bear'st love to any,
For she hath no exchequer now but his,
For since each hand hath put on Nature's power, 
For slander's mark was ever yet the fair;
For still temptation follows where thou art.
For such a time do I now fortify
For summer and his pleasures wait on thee,
For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds;
For term of life thou art assured mine;
For that deep wound it gives my friend and me!
For that same groan doth put this in my mind,
For that sweet odour, which doth in it live.
For that which longer nurseth the disease;
For thee, against my self I'll vow debate,
For thee, and for myself, no quiet find.
For thee watch I, whilst thou dost wake elsewhere,
For then despite of space I would be brought,
For then my thoughts--from far where I abide--
For there can live no hatred in thine eye,
For they in thee a thousand errors note;
For thou art covetous, and he is kind;
For thou art so possess'd with murderous hate,
For, thou betraying me, I do betray
For thou not farther than my thoughts canst move,
For through the painter must you see his skill,
For thy neglect of truth in beauty dy'd?
For thy records and what we see doth lie,
For thy sweet love remember'd such wealth brings
For to no other pass my verses tend
For to thy sensual fault I bring in sense,--
For truth proves thievish for a prize so dear.
For we, which now behold these present days,
For well thou know'st to my dear doting heart
For what care I who calls me well or ill, 
For when these quicker elements are gone
For where is she so fair whose unear'd womb
For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit,
For who's so dumb that cannot write to thee,
For why should others' false adulterate eyes
For you in me can nothing worthy prove;
Forgot upon your dearest love to call, 
From fairest creatures we desire increase,
From hands of falsehood, in sure wards of trust!
From heaven to hell is flown away.
From hence your memory death cannot take,
From his low tract, and look another way:
From limits far remote, where thou dost stay.
From me far off, with others all too near.
From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven's gate,;
From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year!
From this vile world with vilest worms to dwell:
From thy behaviour; beauty doth he give,
From whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part;
From where thou art why should I haste me thence?
From you have I been absent in the spring,
Full character'd with lasting memory,
Full many a glorious morning have I seen
'Gainst death, and all-oblivious enmity
Gentle thou art, and therefore to be won,
Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy;
Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth;
Give my love fame faster than Time wastes life,
Give not a windy night a rainy morrow,
Give salutation to my sportive blood?
Give them thy fingers, me thy lips to kiss.
Give warning to the world that I am fled
Giving him aid, my verse astonished.
Gor'd mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear,
Grant, if thou wilt, thou art belov'd of many,
Great princes' favourites their fair leaves spread
Growing a bath and healthful remedy,
Grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater.
Had, having, and in quest, to have extreme;
'Had my friend's Muse grown with this growing age,
Hang on such thorns, and play as wantonly
Haply I think on thee,-- and then my state,
Happy to have thy love, happy to die!
Harsh, featureless, and rude, barrenly perish:
Hast thou, the master mistress of my passion;
Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving:
Hath been before, how are our brains beguil'd,
Hath dear religious love stol'n from mine eye,
Hath left me, and I desperate now approve
Hath motion, and mine eye may be deceiv'd:
Hath put a spirit of youth in every thing,
Hath travell'd on to age's steepy night;
Have added feathers to the learned's wing
Have eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise.
Have faculty by nature to subsist;
Have from the forests shook three summers' pride,
Have I not seen dwellers on form and favour
Have put on black and loving mourners be,
He is contented thy poor drudge to be,
He learn'd but surety-like to write for me,
He lends thee virtue, and he stole that word
He, nor that affable familiar ghost
He of tall building, and of goodly pride:
He pays the whole, and yet am I not free.
He robs thee of, and pays it thee again.
Hearing you praised, I say ''tis so, 'tis true,'
Hence, thou suborned informer! a true soul
Her audit (though delayed) answered must be,
Her eyes so suited, and they mourners seem
Her 'love,' for whose dear love I rise and fall.
Her pretty looks have been mine enemies;
Herein lives wisdom, beauty, and increase;
Hers by thy beauty tempting her to thee,
Hiding thy bravery in their rotten smoke?
Him have I lost; thou hast both him and me:
Him in thy course untainted do allow
His beauty shall in these black lines be seen,
His rider lov'd not speed, being made from thee:
His tender heir might bear his memory:
Holds in perfection but a little moment,
How can I then be elder than thou art?
How can I then return in happy plight,
How can it? O! how can Love's eye be true, 
How can my muse want subject to invent,
How careful was I when I took my way,
How far a modern quill doth come too short,
How far I toil, still farther off from thee. 
How have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted,
How heavy do I journey on the way,
How like a winter hath my absence been
How like Eve's apple doth thy beauty grow,
How many a holy and obsequious tear
How many gazers mightst thou lead away,
How many lambs might the stern wolf betray,
How much more praise deserv'd thy beauty's use,
How oft when thou, my music, music play'st,
How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame
How to divide the conquest of thy sight;
How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea,
How would, I say, mine eyes be blessed made
How would thy shadow's form form happy show
Hung with the trophies of my lovers gone,
I all alone beweep my outcast state,
I am to wait, though waiting so be hell,
I cannot blame thee, for my love thou usest;
I do believe her though I know she lies,
I do forgive thy robbery, gentle thief,
I found, or thought I found, you did exceed
I grant I never saw a goddess go,--
I grant, sweet love, thy lovely argument
I grant thou wert not married to my Muse,
I guess one angel in another's hell:
'I hate', from hate away she threw,
'I hate' she alter'd with an end,
I have no precious time at all to spend;
I have seen roses damask'd, red and white,
I love not less, though less the show appear;
I love to hear her speak, yet well I know
I make my love engrafted, to this store:
I may be straight though they themselves be bevel;
I may not evermore acknowledge thee,
I must attend, time's leisure with my moan;
I must each day say o'er the very same;
I never saw that you did painting need,
I never writ, nor no man ever lov'd.
I see a better state to me belongs
I see descriptions of the fairest wights,
I see their antique pen would have express'd
I send them back again, and straight grow sad.
I should in thought control your times of pleasure,
I, sick withal, the help of bath desired,
I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought,
I summon up remembrance of things past,
I tell the day, to please him thou art bright,
I think good thoughts, whilst others write good words,
I was not sick of any fear from thence:
I will acquaintance strangle, and look strange;
I will be true despite thy scythe and thee.
I will not praise that purpose not to sell.
If all were minded so, the times should cease
If any, be a satire to decay,
If eyes, corrupt by over-partial looks, 
If from thyself, to store thou wouldst convert'; 
If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head.
If I could write the beauty of your eyes,
If I lose thee, my loss is my love's gain,
If I might teach thee wit, better it were,
If it be not, then love doth well denote
If it be poison'd, 'tis the lesser sin
If it were fill'd with your most high deserts?
If like a lamb he could his looks translate!
If my dear love were but the child of state,
If my slight muse do please these curious days,
If Nature, sovereign mistress over wrack,
If not from my love's breath? The purple pride
If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun;
If some suspect of ill mask'd not thy show,
If ten of thine ten times refigur'd thee:
If that be fair whereon my false eyes dote,
If the dull substance of my flesh were thought,
If the true concord of well-tuned sounds,
If there be nothing new, but that which is
If thinking on me then should make you woe.
If this be error and upon me prov'd,
If thou couldst answer 'This fair child of mine
If thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide,
If thou survive my well-contented day,
If thou turn back and my loud crying still.
If thou wilt leave me, do not leave me last,
if thou wouldst use the strength of all thy state!
If thy soul check thee that I come so near, 
If thy sweet virtue answer not thy show!
If thy unworthiness rais'd love in me,
If Time have any wrinkle graven there;
In a cold valley-fountain of that ground;
In act thy bed-vow broke, and new faith torn,
In all external grace you have some part,
In days long since, before these last so bad.
In faith I do not love thee with mine eyes, 
In gentle numbers time so idly spent;
In him those holy antique hours are seen,
In loving thee thou know'st I am forsworn,
In many's looks, the false heart's history
In me thou see'st the glowing of such fire,
In me thou see'st the twilight of such day
In my love's veins thou hast too grossly dy'd.
In nothing art thou black save in thy deeds,
In one of thine, from that which thou departest;
In other accents do this praise confound
In others' works thou dost but mend the style,
In our two loves there is but one respect,
In polish'd form of well-refined pen.
In praise of ladies dead and lovely knights,
In process of the seasons have I seen,
In pursuit of the thing she would have stay;
In sequent toil all forwards do contend.
In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear. 
In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.
In so profound abysm I throw all care
In tender embassy of love to thee,
In the distraction of this madding fever!
In the old age black was not counted fair,
In thee thy summer, ere thou be distill'd:
In things of great receipt with ease we prove
In things right true my heart and eyes have err'd,
In thy soul's thought, all naked, will bestow it:
In true plain words, by thy true-telling friend;
In vowing new hate after new love bearing:
In whose confine immured is the store
In winged speed n:motion shall I know,
Incapable of more, replete with you,
Incertainties now crown themselves assur'd,
Increasing store with loss, and loss with store;
Injurious distance should not stop my way;
Intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee,
Is but the seemly raiment of my heart,
Is from the book of honour razed quite,
Is it for fear to wet a widow's eye,
Is it thy spirit that thou send'st from thee
Is it thy will, thy image should keep open
Is lust in action: and till action, lust
Is more than my o'erpress'd defence can bide?
Is perjur'd, murderous, bloody, full of blame,
Is poorly imitated after you;
Is writ in moods, and frowns, and wrinkles strange. 
Is't not enough to torture me alone,
It fears not policy, that heretic,
It is my love that keeps mine eye awake:
It is so grounded inward in my heart.
It is the star to every wandering bark,
It might for Fortune's bastard be unfather'd,
It suffers not in smiling pomp, nor falls
Join with the spite of fortune, make me bow,
Just to the time, not with the time exchang'd,
Kill me outright with looks, and rid my pain.
Kill me with spites yet we must not be foes.
Kind is my love to-day, to-morrow kind,
Kissing with golden face the meadows green,
Knowing a better spirit doth use your name,
Knowing thy heart torment me with disdain,
Laid by his side his heart-inflaming brand,
Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows,
Lean penury within that pen doth dwell
Leaving thee living in posterity?
Leese but their show; their substance still lives sweet.
Lest eyes well-seeing thy foul faults should find.
Lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove:
Lest I, too much profane, should do it wrong,
Lest my bewailed guilt should do thee shame,
Lest sorrow lend me words, and words express
Lest the wise world should look into your moan,
Let him but copy what in you is writ,
Let me confess that we two must be twain,
Let me excuse thee: ah! my love well knows
Let me not to the marriage of true minds
Let no unkind 'No' fair beseechers kill;
Let not my love be call'd idolatry,
Let them say more that like of hearsay well;
Let this sad interim like the ocean be
Let those who are in favour with their stars
Let those whom nature hath not made for store,
Lifts up his burning head, each under eye
Like a deceived husband; so love's face
Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore,
Like as, to make our appetite more keen,
Like feeble age, he reeleth from the day,
Like him that travels, I return again;
Like stones of worth they thinly placed are,
Like to the lark at break of day arising
Like widow'd wombs after their lords' decease:
Lilies that fester, smell far worse than weeds.
Lo, as a careful housewife runs to catch
Lo! in the orient when the gracious light
Lo! thus, by day my limbs, by night my mind,
Look in thy glass and tell the face thou viewest
Look in your glass, and there appears a face
Look! what an unthrift in the world doth spend
Look what is best, that best I wish in thee:
Look! what thy memory cannot contain,
Look, whom she best endow'd, she gave thee more;
Looking on darkness which the blind do see:
Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain.
Lord of my love, to whom in vassalage
Lose all and more by paying too much rent
Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,
Love is a babe, then might I not say so,
Love is my sin, and thy dear virtue hate,
Love is too young to know what conscience is, 
Love's eye is not so true as all men's: no,
Love's fire heats water, water cools not love.
Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks
Loving offenders thus I will excuse ye:
Mad in pursuit and in possession so;
Mad slanderers by mad ears believed be.
Made more or less by thy continual haste.
Made old offences of affections new;
Make answer Muse: wilt thou not haply say,
Make but my name thy love, and love that still,
Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleets,
Make sweet some vial; treasure thou some place
Make thee another self for love of me,
Make war upon this bloody tyrant, Time?
Makes black night beauteous, and her old face new.
Makes summer's welcome, thrice more wished, more rare.
Making a couplement of proud compare'
Making a famine where abundance lies,
Making dead wood more bless'd than living lips.
Making his style admired every where.
Making lascivious comments on thy sport,
Making no summer of another's green,
Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew?
Mark how one string, sweet husband to another,
Mark how with my neglect I do dispense:
May make seem bare, in wanting words to show it,
May still seem love to me, though alter'd new;
May time disgrace and wretched minutes kill.
Me for my dumb thoughts, speaking in effect.
Me from myself thy cruel eye hath taken,
Methinks no face so gracious is as mine,
Might I not then say, 'Now I love you best,'
Mine appetite I never more will grind
Mine be thy love and thy love's use their treasure.
Mine eye and heart are at a mortal war,
Mine eye hath play'd the painter and hath stell'd,
Mine eye my heart thy picture's sight would bar,
Mine eye well knows what with his gust is 'greeing, 
Mine eyes have drawn thy shape, and thine for me
Mine own self-love quite contrary I read;
Mine own true love that doth my rest defeat,
Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransom me.
More flowers I noted, yet I none could see,
More sharp to me than spurring to his side;
More than enough am I that vex'd thee still,
More than that tongue that more hath more express'd.
More worthy I to be belov'd of thee.
Most true it is, that I have look'd on truth
Most worthy comfort, now my greatest grief,
Much liker than your painted counterfeit:
Music to hear, why hear'st thou music sadly?
My body is the frame wherein 'tis held,
My bonds in thee are all determinate.
My deepest sense, how hard true sorrow hits,
My glass shall not persuade me I am old,
My grief lies onward, and my joy behind.
My heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie,--
My heart mine eye the freedom of that right.
My heavy eyelids to the weary night?
My life, being made of four, with two alone
My life hath in this line some interest,
My love is as a fever longing still,
My love is strengthen'd, though more weak in seeming;
My love looks fresh, and Death to me subscribes,
My love shall in my verse ever live young.
My mistress' eyes are nothing like the sun;
My mistress, when she walks, treads on the ground:
My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer.
My most true mind thus maketh mine untrue.
My name be buried where my body is,
My nobler part to my gross body's treason;
My reason, the physician to my love, 
My saucy bark, inferior far to his,
My sinful earth these rebel powers array,
My soul doth tell my body that he may
My spirit is thine, the better part of me:
My sweet love's beauty, though my lover's life:
My thoughts and my discourse as madmen's are,
My tongue-tied Muse in manners holds her still,
My tongue-tied patience with too much disdain;
My verse alone had all thy gentle grace;
Myself corrupting, salving thy amiss,
Myself I'll forfeit, so that other mine
Naming thy name, blesses an ill report.
Nativity, once in the main of light,
Nature's bequest gives nothing, but doth lend,
Nay, if thou lour'st on me, do I not spend
Nay, if you read this line, remember not
Needs must I under my transgression bow,
Neither in inward worth nor outward fair,
Never believe though in my nature reign'd,
No bitterness that I will bitter think,
No, I am that I am, and they that level
No, it was builded far from accident;
No; let me be obsequious in thy heart,
No longer mourn for me when I am dead
No longer yours, than you your self here live:
No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call;
No love toward others in that bosom sits
No marvel then, though I mistake my view;
No matter then although my foot did stand
No more be griev'd at that which thou hast done:
No, neither he, nor his compeers by night
No news but health from their physicians know;--
No praise to thee, but what in thee doth live. 
No shape so true, no truth of such account;
No, Time, thou shalt not boast that I do change:
No want of conscience hold it that I call
None else to me, nor I to none alive,
Nor are mine ears with thy tongue's tune delighted;
Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell,
Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief;
Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour,
Nor dare I question with my jealous thought
Nor did I wonder at the lily's white,
Nor double penance, to correct correction.
Nor draw no lines there with thine antique pen;
Nor gates of steel so strong but Time decays?
Nor gives to necessary wrinkles place,
Nor his own vision holds what it doth catch;
Nor it, nor no remembrance what it was:
Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow'st,
Nor Mars his sword, nor war's quick fire shall burn
Nor my beloved as an idol show,
Nor need I tallies thy dear love to score;
Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose;
Nor services to do, till you require. 
Nor shall death brag thou wander'st in his shade,
Nor taste, nor smell, desire to be invited
Nor tender feeling, to base touches prone,
Nor that full star that ushers in the even,
Nor think the bitterness of absence sour,
Nor thou with public kindness honour me,
Not blame your pleasure be it ill or well.
Not by our feeling, but by others' seeing:
Not from the stars do I my judgement pluck;
Not making worse what nature made so clear,
Not marble, nor the gilded monuments
Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul
Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine?
Not prizing her poor infant's discontent;
Not that the summer is less pleasant now
Not wondering at the present nor the past,
Nothing, sweet boy; but yet, like prayers divine,
Now all is done, save what shall have no end:
Now counting best to be with you alone,
Now is the time that face should form another;
Now proud as an enjoyer, and anon
Now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done:
Now stand you on the top of happy hours,
Now this ill-wresting world is grown so bad,
Now, while the world is bent my deeds to cross,
Now with the drops of this most balmy time,
O absence! what a torment wouldst thou prove,
O benefit of ill! now I find true
O! blame me not, if I no more can write!
O! but with mine compare thou thine own state,
O! call not me to justify the wrong
O! carve not with thy hours my love's fair brow,
O! change thy thought, that I may change my mind:
O cunning Love! with tears thou keep'st me blind,
O fearful meditation! where, alack,
O! for my sake do you with Fortune chide,
O! from what power hast thou this powerful might,
O! give thy self the thanks, if aught in me
O! him she stores, to show what wealth she had
O! how I faint when I of you do write,
O! how much more doth beauty beauteous seem
O! how shall summer's honey breath hold out,
O! how thy worth with manners may I sing,
O! if,--I say you look upon this verse,
O! in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose.
O! know sweet love I always write of you,
O! learn to read what silent love hath writ:
O! lest the world should task you to recite
O! lest your true love may seem false in this
O! let it then as well beseem thy heart
O! let me suffer, being at your beck,
O! let me, true in love, but truly write,
O! let my looks be then the eloquence
O! love's best habit is in seeming trust,
O me! what eyes hath Love put in my head,
O! never say that I was false of heart,
O, no! it is an ever-fixed mark,
O, no! thy love, though much, is not so great:
O! none but unthrifts. Dear my love, you know,
O! none, unless this miracle have might,
O! sure I am the wits of former days,
O! that our night of woe might have remember'd
O! that record could with a backward look,
O! that you were your self; but, love you are
O! then vouchsafe me but this loving thought:
O! therefore love, be of thyself so wary
O thou, my lovely boy, who in thy power
O! though I love what others do abhor,
O! 'tis the first, 'tis flattery in my seeing,
O truant Muse what shall be thy amends
O! what a happy title do I find,
O! what a mansion have those vices got
O! what excuse will my poor beast then find,
Oaths of thy love, thy truth, thy constancy;
O'er whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait,
O'ercharg'd with burthen of mine own love's might. 
Of bird, of flower, or shape which it doth latch:
Of different flowers in odour and in hue,
Of faults conceal'd, wherein I am attainted;
Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow,
Of him, myself, and thee I am forsaken;
Of his quick objects hath the mind no part, 
Of his self-love to stop posterity? 
Of more delight than hawks and horses be;
Of mouthed graves will give thee memory;
Of my dull bearer when from thee I speed:
Of others' voices, that my adder's sense
Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons' quality;
Of princes, shall outlive this powerful rhyme;
Of public honour and proud titles boast,
Of the wide world dreaming on things to come,
Of thee, thy record never can be miss'd.
Of their fair subject, blessing every book. 
Of their sweet deaths, are sweetest odours made: 
Of this our time, all you prefiguring;
Of thy fair health, recounting it to me:
On both sides thus is simple truth suppressed:
On Helen's cheek all art of beauty set,
On newer proof, to try an older friend,
On purpose laid to make the taker mad:
On whom frown'st thou that I do fawn upon,
On your broad main doth wilfully appear.
One blushing shame, another white despair;
One of her feather'd creatures broke away,
One on another's neck, do witness bear
One thing expressing, leaves out difference.
One will of mine, to make thy large will more.
Only my plague thus far I count my gain,
Or any of these all, or all, or more,
Or as sweet-season'd showers are to the ground;
Or as the wardrobe which the robe doth hide,
Or, at the least, so long as brain and heart
Or at your hand the account of hours to crave,
Or, being wrack'd, I am a worthless boat,
Or bends with the remover to remove:
Or call it winter, which being full of care,
Or captain jewels in the carcanet.
Or durst inhabit on a living brow;
Or else of thee this I prognosticate:
Or else receiv'st with pleasure thine annoy?
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew: 
Or gluttoning on all, or all away.
Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother,
Or I shall live your epitaph to make,
Or, if it do, not from those lips of thine, 
Or if it were, it bore not beauty's name;
Or, if they have, where is my judgment fled,
Or, if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer,
Or, if they sleep, thy picture in my sight
Or laid great bases for eternity,
Or made them swear against the thing they see;
Or me to whom thou gav'st it, else mistaking;
Or mine eyes, seeing this, say this is not,
Or on my frailties why are frailer spies,
Or say with princes if it shall go well
Or some fierce thing replete with too much rage,
Or state itself confounded, to decay;
Or ten times happier, be it ten for one;
Or to thyself at least kind-hearted prove:
Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back?
Or whether doth my mind, being crown'd with you,
Or whether revolution be the same. 
Or whether shall I say, mine eye saith true,
Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?
Or who is he so fond will be the tomb,
Or you survive when I in earth am rotten;
Others, but stewards of their excellence.
Our dates are brief, and therefore we admire
Our love was new, and then but in the spring,
Painting my age with beauty of thy days.
Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?
Past cure I am, now Reason is past care,
Past reason hated, as a swallow'd bait,
Past reason hunted; and no sooner had,
Perforce am thine, and all that is in me.
Pitiful thrivers, in their gazing spent?
Pity me, then, and wish I were renew'd;
Pity me then, dear friend, and I assure ye,
Pity the world, or else this glutton be,
Plods dully on, to bear that weight in me,
Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger's jaws,
Pointing to each his thunder, rain and wind,
Points on me graciously with fair aspect,
Poor soul, the centre of my sinful earth, 
Possessing or pursuing no delight,
Potions of eisel 'gainst my strong infection;
Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand.
Presents thy shadow to my sightless view,
Presume not on th;heart when mine is slain,
Prison my heart in thy steel bosom's ward, 
Profitless usurer, why dost thou use
Proving his beauty by succession thine!
Receiving nought by elements so slow
Resembling sire and child and happy mother,
Resembling strong youth in his middle age,
Reserve their character with golden quill,
Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme,
Return forgetful Muse, and straight redeem,
Return of love, more blest may be the view;
Revenge upon myself with present moan?
Richer than wealth, prouder than garments' costs,
Rise, resty Muse, my love's sweet face survey,
Robb'd others' beds' revenues of their rents.
Robbing no old to dress his beauty new;
Root pity in thy heart, that, when it grows,
Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud:
Roses of shadow, since his rose is true?
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate--
Sap checked with frost, and lusty leaves quite gone,
Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust;
Save breed, to brave him when he takes thee hence.
Save that my soul's imaginary sight
Save that, to die, I leave my love alone.
Save thou, my rose, in it thou art my all.
Save what is had, or must from you be took.
Save where thou art not, though I feel thou art,
Save, where you are, how happy you make those.
Say that thou didst forsake me for some fault,
Seeking that beauteous roof to ruinate
Seems seeing, but effectually is out;
Self so self-loving were iniquity.
Serving with looks his sacred majesty; 
Sets down her babe, and makes all swift dispatch
Sets you most rich in youth before my sight,
Shall hate be fairer lodg'd than gentle love?
Shall I compare thee to a summer's day?
Shall neigh--no dull flesh--in his fiery race;
Shall profit thee and much enrich thy book.
Shall reasons find of settled gravity;
Shall sum my count, and make my old excuse,'
Shall Time's best jewel from Time's chest lie hid?
Shall will in others seem right gracious,
Shall worms, inheritors of this excess,
Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room
She carv'd thee for her seal, and meant thereby,
She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill
She may detain, but not still keep, her treasure:
Shifts but his place, for still the world enjoys it;
Show me your image in some antique book,
Showing their birth, and where they did proceed?
Simply I credit her false-speaking tongue:
Sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye
Since all alike my songs and praises be
Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea,
Since every one, hath every one, one shade,
Since first I saw you fresh, which yet are green.
'Since from thee going, he went wilful-slow,
Since I left you, mine eye is in my mind;
Since mind at first in character was done!
Since my appeal says I did strive to prove
Since saucy jacks so happy are in this,
Since, seldom coming in that long year set,
Since, spite of him, I'll live in this poor rime,
Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake
Since that my life on thy revolt doth lie.
Since what he owes thee, thou thyself dost pay.
Since why to love I can allege no cause.
Sing to the ear that doth thy lays esteem
Sings this to thee: 'Thou single wilt prove none.'
Sinks down to death, oppress'd with melancholy;
Sland'ring creation with a false esteem:
So all my best is dressing old words new,
So all their praises are but prophecies
So am I as the rich, whose blessed key,
So are those errors that in thee are seen
So are you to my thoughts as food to life,
So do our minutes hasten to their end;
So dost thou too, and therein dignified.
So, either by thy picture or my love,
So far from home into my deeds to pry,
So far from variation or quick change?
So flatter I the swart-complexion'd night,
So great a sum of sums, yet canst not live?
So him I lose through my unkind abuse.
So I, for fear of trust, forget to say
So I, made lame by Fortune's dearest spite,
So I return rebuk'd to my content,
So is it not with me as with that Muse,
So is my love still telling what is told.
So is the time that keeps you as my chest,
So long as men can breathe, or eyes can see,
So long as youth and thou are of one date;
So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.
So, love, be thou, although to-day thou fill
So, now I have confess'd that he is thine,
So oft have I invoked thee for my Muse,
So runn'st thou after that which flies from thee, 
So shall I live, supposing thou art true,
So shall those blots that do with me remain,
So shall thou feed on Death, that feeds on men,
So should my papers, yellow'd with their age,
So should that beauty which you hold in lease
So should the lines of life that life repair,
So that eternal love in love's fresh case,
So that myself bring water for my stain.
So then I am not lame, poor, nor despis'd,
So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life,
So thou be good, slander doth but approve
So thou, being rich in 'Will,' add to thy 'Will'
So thou prevent'st his scythe and crooked knife.
So thou through windows of thine age shalt see,
So thou, thyself outgoing in thy noon:
So thy great gift, upon misprision growing,
So, till the judgment that yourself arise,
So true a fool is love, that in your will,
So will I pray that thou mayst have thy 'Will,'
So you o'er-green my bad, my good allow?
So your sweet hue, which methinks still doth stand,
Some fresher stamp of the time-bettering days.
Some glory in their birth, some in their skill,
Some in their garments though new-fangled ill;
Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse;
Some in their wealth, some in their body's force,
Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonness;
Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport;
Sometime all full with feasting on your sight,
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
Speak of my lameness, and I straight will halt,
Speak of the spring, and foison of the year,
Speaking of worth, what worth in you doth grow. 
Spending again what is already spent:
Spend'st thou thy fury on some worthless song,
Steal from his figure, and no pace perceiv'd;
Stealing away the treasure of his spring; 
Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace: 
Still constant in a wondrous excellence;
Still losing when I saw myself to win!
Stirr'd by a painted beauty to his verse,
Straight in her heart did mercy come,
Strikes each in each by mutual ordering;
Such cherubins as your sweet self resemble,
Such civil war is in my love and hate,
Such heavenly touches ne'er touch'd earthly faces.'
Such is my love, to thee I so belong,
Such seems your beauty still. Three winters cold,
Suffering my friend for my sake to approve her.
Suns of the world may stain when heaven's sun staineth.
Supposed as forfeit to a confin'd doom.
Suspect I may, yet not directly tell;
Swear to thy blind soul that I was thy 'Will',
Sweet beauty hath no name, no holy bower,
Sweet flattery! then she loves but me alone.
Sweet love, renew thy force; be it not said
Sweet thief, whence didst thou steal thy sweet that smells,
Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy:
Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth; 
Take all my loves, my love, yea take them all;
Take heed, dear heart, of this large privilege;
Tan sacred beauty, blunt the sharp'st intents,
Tell me thou lov'st elsewhere; but in my sight,
Tempteth my better angel from my side,
Ten times thy self were happier than thou art,
Than both your poets can in praise devise.
Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks.
Than niggard truth would willingly impart:
Than of your graces and your gifts to tell;
Than public means which public manners breeds.
Than that which on thy humour doth depend:
Than think that we before have heard them told.
Than this rich praise,--that you alone, are you?
Than those old nine which rhymers invocate;
Than unswept stone, besmear'd with sluttish time.
Than when her mournful hymns did hush the night,
Than when it hath my added praise beside!
Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell
That all the world besides methinks are dead.
That am debarre'd the benefit of rest?
That barren tender of a poet's debt:
That beauty still may live in thine or thee.
That better is, by evil still made better;
That by this separation I may give
That censures falsely what they see aright?
That did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearse,
That did not better for my life provide
That do not do the thing they most do show,
That due of many now is thine alone:
That due to thee which thou deserv'st alone.
That every tongue says beauty should look so.
That every word doth almost tell my name,
That followed it as gentle day,
That for thy right, myself will bear all wrong.
That 'gainst thy self thou stick'st not to conspire,
That god forbid, that made me first your slave,
That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes.
That have profan'd their scarlet ornaments
That having such a scope to show her pride,
That he shall never cut from memory
That heals the wound, and cures not the disgrace:
That heaven's air in this huge rondure hems.
That heavy Saturn laugh'd and leap'd with him.
That I an accessary needs must be,
That I have frequent been with unknown minds,
That I have hoisted sail to all the winds
That I in thy abundance am suffic'd,
That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot,
That I may not be so, nor thou belied,
That I might see what the old world could say
That in black ink my love may still shine bright.
That, in my mind, thy worst all best exceeds?
That in the very refuse of thy deeds
That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell;
That is my home of love: if I have rang'd,
That is so proud thy service to despise,
That is so vexed with watching and with tears?
That it could so preposterously be stain'd, 
That it nor grows with heat, nor drowns with showers.
That leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near.
That looks on tempests and is never shaken;
That love is merchandiz'd, whose rich esteeming,
That may express my love, or thy dear merit?
That millions of strange shadows on you tend?
That mine eye loves it and doth first begin.
That music hath a far more pleasing sound:
That my steel'd sense or changes right or wrong.
That nothing me, a something sweet to thee:
That on himself such murd'rous shame commits.
That on the ashes of his youth doth lie,
That over-goes my blunt invention quite, 
That poor retention could not so much hold,
That she hath thee is of my wailing chief,
That she might think me some untutor'd youth,
That she that makes me sin awards me pain.
That sin by him advantage should achieve,
That sometimes anger thrusts into his hide,
That then I scorn to change my state with kings.
That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
That they behold, and see not what they see?
That they elsewhere might dart their injuries:
That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows
That thou among the wastes of time must go,
That thou art blam'd shall not be thy defect,
That thou consum'st thy self in single life?
That thou hast her it is not all my grief,
That thou in losing me shalt win much glory: 
That thou no form of thee hast left behind,
That thy unkindness lays upon my heart;
That time of year thou mayst in me behold
That Time will come and take my love away. 
That to his subject lends not some small glory;
That to my use it might unused stay
That tongue that tells the story of thy days,
That use is not forbidden usury,
That wear this world out to the ending doom.
That you are you, so dignifies his story,
That you for love speak well of me untrue,
That you were once unkind befriends me now,
That you yourself, being extant, well might show
That you yourself may privilage your time
That's for thy self to breed another thee,
The age to come would say 'This poet lies;
The argument, all bare, is of more worth
The basest jewel will be well esteem'd,
The basest weed outbraves his dignity: 
The beast that bears me, tired with my woe,
The better angel is a man right fair,
The bloody spur cannot provoke him on,
The bounteous largess given thee to give?
The boy for trial needs would touch my breast;
The canker blooms have full as deep a dye
The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting,
The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing;
The clear eye's moiety, and the dear heart's part:
The constancy and virtue of your love.
The coward conquest of a wretch's knife,
The crow, or dove, it shapes them to your feature.
The dear respose for limbs with travel tir'd;
The dedicated words which writers use
The earth can have but earth, which is his due;
The earth can yield me but a common grave,
The expense of spirit in a waste of shame
The eyes, 'fore duteous, now converted are
The fairest votary took up that fire
The first my thought, the other my desire,
The forward violet thus did I chide:
The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds,
The hand that writ it, for I love you so,
The hardest knife ill-us'd doth lose his edge.
The humble as the proudest sail doth bear,
The humble salve, which wounded bosoms fits!
The ills that were not, grew to faults assur'd,
The imprison'd absence of your liberty;
The injuries that to myself I do,
The lily I condemned for thy hand,
The little Love-god lying once asleep,
The living record of your memory.
The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell,
The manner of my pity-wanting pain.
The more I hear and see just cause of hate?
The mortal moon hath her eclipse endur'd,
The most sweet favour or deformed'st creature,
The mountain or the sea, the day or night:
The offender's sorrow lends but weak relief
The one by toil, the other to complain
The one doth shadow of your beauty show,
The ornament of beauty is suspect,
The other as your bounty doth appear;
The other two, slight air, and purging fire
The owner's tongue doth publish every where.
The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise.
The painful warrior famoused for fight,
The perfect ceremony of love's rite,
The prey of worms, my body being dead;
The region cloud hath mask'd him from me now.
The rich-proud cost of outworn buried age;
The right of sepulchres, were shorn away,
The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem
The roses fearfully on thorns did stand,
The sad account of fore-bemoaned moan,
The scope and tenure of thy jealousy?
The sea, all water, yet receives rain still,
The second burthen of a former child!
The soil is this, that thou dost common grow.
The spirit of love, with a perpetual dulness.
The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take,
The summer's flower is to the summer sweet,
The sun itself sees not, till heaven clears.
The teeming autumn, big with rich increase,
The uncertain sickly appetite to please.
The very part was consecrate to thee:
The which he will not every hour survey,
The wiry concord that mine ear confounds,
The world will be thy widow and still weep
The world will wail thee like a makeless wife;
The worser spirit a woman colour'd ill.
The worst was this,--my love was my decay.
The worth of that is that which it contains,
The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show
Thee have I not lock'd up in any chest,
Their images I lov'd, I view in thee,
Theirs for their style I'll read, his for his love'.
Then, beauteous niggard, why dost thou abuse
Then being asked, where all thy beauty lies,
Then better'd that the world may see my pleasure:
Then can I drown an eye, unused to flow,
Then can I grieve at grievances foregone,
Then can no horse with my desire keep pace;
Then do thy office, Muse; I teach thee how
Then, gentle cheater, urge not my amiss,
Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best,
Then happy I, that love and am belov'd,
Then hate me when thou wilt; if ever, now;
Then how when nature calls thee to be gone,
Then, if for my love, thou my love receivest,
Then if he thrive and I be cast away,
Then, in the blazon of sweet beauty's best,
Then in the number let me pass untold,
Then lacked I matter; that enfeebled mine.
Then let not winter's ragged hand deface,
Then look I death my days should expiate. 
Then may I dare to boast how I do love thee;
Then need I not to fear the worst of wrongs,
Then of thy beauty do I question make,
Then others, for the breath of words respect,
Then should I spur, though mounted on the wind,
Then soul, live thou upon thy servant's loss,
Then thank him not for that which he doth say,
Then the conceit of this inconstant stay
Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe.
Then thou, whose shadow shadows doth make bright,
Then were not summer's distillation left,
Then what could death do if thou shouldst depart,
Then will I swear beauty herself is black,
Thence comes it that my name receives a brand,
Then--churls--their thoughts, although their eyes were kind,
There is such strength and warrantise of skill,
There lives more life in one of your fair eyes
Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare,
Therefore desire, of perfect'st love being made,
Therefore I lie with her, and she with me,
Therefore in that I cannot know thy change.
Therefore like her, I sometime hold my tongue:
Therefore my mistress' eyes are raven black,
Therefore my verse to constancy confin'd,
Therefore to give them from me was I bold,
These blenches gave my heart another youth,
These offices, so oft as thou wilt look,
These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover,
These present-absent with swift motion slide.
These vacant leaves thy mind's imprint will bear,
They are but dressings of a former sight.
They are the lords and owners of their faces,
They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds
They draw but what they see, know not the heart.
They had not skill enough your worth to sing:
They know what beauty is, see where it lies,
They live unwoo'd, and unrespected fade;
They look into the beauty of thy mind,
They rightly do inherit heaven's graces,
They that have power to hurt, and will do none,
They were but sweet, but figures of delight,
Thine by thy beauty being false to me.
Thine eyes I love, and they, as pitying me,
Thine eyes, that taught the dumb on high to sing
Thine own sweet argument, too excellent
Think all but one, and me in that one 'Will.'
This brand she quenched in a cool well by,
This I do vow and this shall ever be;
This silence for my sin you did impute,
This thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong,
This thought is as a death which cannot choose
This told, I joy; but then no longer glad,
This were to be new made when thou art old,
This wish I have; then ten times happy me!
Those children nursed, deliver'd from thy brain,
Those hours, that with gentle work did frame
Those lines that I before have writ do lie,
Those lips that Love's own hand did make,
Those parts of thee that the world's eye doth view
Those pretty wrongs that liberty commits,
Those that can see thou lov'st, and I am blind.
Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue,
Thou art as tyrannous, so as thou art, 
Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
Thou art the fairest and most precious jewel.
Thou art the grave where buried love doth live,
Thou art thy mother's glass and she in thee
Thou best of dearest, and mine only care,
Thou blind fool, Love, what dost thou to mine eyes,
Thou by thy dial's shady stealth mayst know
Thou canst not love disgrace me half so ill,
Thou canst not then use rigour in my jail:
Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind,
Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother.
Thou dost love her, because thou know'st I love her;
Thou gav'st me thine not to give back again.
Thou hast passed by the ambush of young days
Thou mak'st faults graces that to thee resort.
Thou mayst be false, and yet I know it not.
Thou mayst call thine when thou from youth convertest,
Thou of thy self thy sweet self dost deceive:
Thou shouldst print more, not let that copy die.
Thou that art now the world's fresh ornament,
Thou truly fair, wert truly sympathiz'd
Thou usurer, that putt'st forth all to use,
Thou wilt restore to be my comfort still:
Though absence seem'd my flame to qualify,
Though I, once gone, to all the world must die:
Though in our lives a separable spite,
Though in thy store's account I one must be;
Though not to love, yet, love to tell me so;--
Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss:
Though to itself, it only live and die,
Though words come hindmost, holds his rank before.
Though yet heaven knows it is but as a tomb
Though you do anything, he thinks no ill.
Three April perfumes in three hot Junes burn'd,
Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turn'd,
Three themes in one, which wondrous scope affords.
Through heavy sleep on sightless eyes doth stay!
Thus can my love excuse the slow offence
Thus do I pine and surfeit day by day,
Thus far for love, my love-suit, sweet, fulfil.
'Thus far the miles are measured from thy friend!'
Thus have I had thee, as a dream doth flatter,
Thus is his cheek the map of days outworn,
Thus policy in love, to anticipate
Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,
Thy adverse party is thy advocate,--
Thy beauty, and thy years full well befits,
Thy beauty's form in table of my heart;
Thy black is fairest in my judgment's place.
Thy bosom is endeared with all hearts,
Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste;
Thy edge should blunter be than appetite,
'Thy end is truth's and beauty's doom and date.'
Thy face hath not the power to make love groan;
Thy gift, thy tables, are within my brain
Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear,
Thy hungry eyes, even till they wink with fulness,
Thy looks should nothing thence, but sweetness tell.
Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place:
Thy love is better than high birth to me,
Thy lovers withering, as thy sweet self grow'st.
Thy merit hath my duty strongly knit,
Thy outward thus with outward praise is crown'd;
Thy pity may deserve to pitied be.
Thy proud heart's slave and vassal wretch to be:
Thy pyramids built up with newer might
Thy registers and thee I both defy,
Thy self away, art present still with me;
Thy self thou gav'st, thy own worth then not knowing,
Thy self thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel:
Thy sweet beloved name no more shall dwell,
Thy unused beauty must be tombed with thee,
Thy worth the greater being woo'd of time;
Thy youth's proud livery so gazed on now,
Till each to raz'd oblivion yield his part
Till I return, of posting is no need.
Till my bad angel fire my good one out.
Till Nature, as she wrought thee, fell a-doting,
Till then, not show my head where thou mayst prove me.
Till whatsoever star that guides my moving,
Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth
Time's thievish progress to eternity.
Tir'd with all these, from these would I be gone,
Tired with all these, for restful death I cry,
'Tis better to be vile than vile esteem'd,
'Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break,
'Tis thee,--myself,--that for myself I praise,
To any sensual feast with thee alone:
To be death's conquest and make worms thine heir.
To be diseas'd, ere that there was true needing.
To be so tickled, they would change their state 
To bear love's wrong, than hate's known injury.
To bitter sauces did I frame my feeding;
To change your day of youth to sullied night,
To critic and to flatterer stopped are.
To do more for me than mine own desert,
To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face,
To eat the world's due, by the grave and thee.
To entertain the time with thoughts of love,
To every hymn that able spirit affords,
To find out shames and idle hours in me,
To find where your true image pictur'd lies,
To follow that which flies before her face,
To give away yourself, keeps yourself still,
To give full growth to that which still doth grow?
To guard the lawful reasons on thy part: 
To hear with eyes belongs to love's fine wit.
To hideous winter, and confounds him there;
To him that bears the strong offence's cross. 
To keep an adjunct to remember thee
To kiss the tender inward of thy hand,
To know my shames and praises from your tongue;
To leap large lengths of miles when thou art gone,
To leave for nothing all thy sum of good;
To leave poor me thou hast the strength of laws,
To let base clouds o'ertake me in my way,
To linger out a purpos'd overthrow.
To live a second life on second head;
To love that well, which thou must leave ere long.
To make him much outlive a gilded tomb
To make him seem long hence as he shows now.
To make me give the lie to my true sight,
To make me tongue-tied speaking of your fame!
To make of monsters and things indigest
To make some special instant special-blest,
To mar the subject that before was well?
To march in ranks of better equipage:
To me are nothing novel, nothing strange;
To me, fair friend, you never can be old,
To me that languish'd for her sake:
To mourn for me since mourning doth thee grace,
To new-found methods, and to compounds strange?
To one, of one, still such, and ever so.
To play the watchman ever for thy sake:
To put fair truth upon so foul a face?
To say they err I dare not be so bold,
To say, within thine own deep sunken eyes,
To see his active child do deeds of youth,
To set a form upon desired change,
To show false Art what beauty was of yore.
To show me worthy of thy sweet respect:
To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.
To side this title is impannelled
To speak of that which gives thee all thy might?
To stand in thy affairs, fall by thy side.
To subjects worse have given admiring praise.
To swear against the truth so foul a lie.!
To take a new acquaintance of thy mind.
To that sweet thief which sourly robs from me.
To the clear day with thy much clearer light,
To the wide world and all her fading sweets;
To thee I send this written embassage,
To this composed wonder of your frame;
To this I witness call the fools of time,
To thy fair flower add the rank smell of weeds: 
To thy sweet will making addition thus.
To tie up envy, evermore enlarg'd,
To trust those tables that receive thee more:
To truths translated, and for true things deem'd.
To weigh how once I suffer'd in your crime.
To what it works in, like the dyer's hand:
To what you will; to you it doth belong
To win me soon to hell, my female evil,
To witness duty, not to show my wit:
To work my mind, when body's work's expired: 
To-morrow see again, and do not kill
To-morrow sharpened in his former might:
Too base of thee to be remembered,.
Towards thee I'll run, and give him leave to go.'
Triumph in love; flesh stays no farther reason,
'Truth needs no colour, with his colour fix'd;
Two loves I have of comfort and despair,
Under that bond that him as fast doth bind.
Under the blow of thralled discontent,
Unlearned in the world's false subtleties.
Unless my nerves were brass or hammer'd steel.
Unless this general evil they maintain,
Unless thou take that honour from thy name:
Unless you would devise some virtuous lie,
Unlook'd for joy in that I honour most.
Unlook'd, on diest unless thou get a son.
Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow;
Unthrifty loveliness, why dost thou spend
Until life's composition be recur'd
Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds
Upon the farthest earth remov'd from thee;
Upon the hours, and times of your desire?
Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,
Upon thy part I can set down a story
Upon thy self thy beauty's legacy?
Upon thy side, against myself I'll fight,
Use power with power, and slay me not by art,
Uttering bare truth, even so as foes commend.
Vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease,
Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend;
Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write,
Was it the proud full sail of his great verse,
Was, sleeping, by a virgin hand disarm'd.
Was us'd in giving gentle doom;
We sicken to shun sickness when we purge;
Weary with toil, I haste me to my bed,
Weeds among weeds, or flowers with flowers gather'd.
Weighs not the dust and injury of age,
Were an all-eating shame, and thriftless praise.
Were it not sinful then, striving to mend,
Were it not thy sour leisure gave sweet leave,
Were to import forgetfulness in me.
Were't aught to me I bore the canopy,
What acceptable audit canst thou leave?
What can mine own praise to mine own self bring?
What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen!
What hast thou then more than thou hadst before?
What is your substance, whereof are you made,
What means the world to say it is not so?
What merit do I in my self respect,
What merit lived in me, that you should love
What need'st thou wound with cunning, when thy might
What old December's bareness everywhere! 
What potions have I drunk of Siren tears,
What strained touches rhetoric can lend,
What thou dost foist upon us that is old;
What wretched errors hath my heart committed,
Whate'er thy thoughts, or thy heart's workings be,
What's in the brain, that ink may character,
What's new to speak, what now to register,
When all my best doth worship thy defect,
When all the breathers of this world are dead;
When as thy love hath cast his utmost sum,
When beauty lived and died as flowers do now,
When day's oppression is not eas'd by night,
When every private widow well may keep
When forty winters shall besiege thy brow,
When hours have drain'd his blood and fill'd his brow
When I against myself with thee partake?
When I am sometime absent from thy heart,
When I behold the violet past prime,
When I break twenty? I am perjur'd most;
When I consider every thing that grows
When I do count the clock that tells the time,
When I have seen by Time's fell hand defac'd
When I have seen such interchange of state,
When I have seen the hungry ocean gain
When I perceive that men as plants increase,
When I perhaps compounded am with clay,
When I shall see thee frown on my defects,
When I was certain o'er incertainty,
When I was wont to greet it with my lays;
When in dead night thy fair imperfect shade
When in disgrace with fortune and men's eyes
When in eternal lines to time thou grow'st,
When in the chronicle of wasted time
When in the least of them my life hath end.
When lofty trees I see barren of leaves,
When love, converted from the thing it was,
When most I wink, then do mine eyes best see,
When most impeach'd, stands least in thy control.
When my love swears that she is made of truth,
When not to be receives reproach of being;
When other petty griefs have done their spite,
When others would give life, and bring a tomb.
When proud-pied April, dress'd in all his trim,
When rocks impregnable are not so stout,
When sometime lofty towers I see down-raz'd,
When sparkling stars twire not thou gild'st the even.
When summer's breath their masked buds discloses:
When swift extremity can seem but slow?
When that churl Death my bones with dust shall cover
When that mine eye is famish'd for a look,
When that shall vade, by verse distills your truth.
When thou art all the better part of me?
When thou reviewest this, thou dost review
When thou shalt be dispos'd to set me light,
When thou thy self dost give invention light? 
When to the sessions of sweet silent thought
When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so! 
When tyrants' crests and tombs of brass are spent.
When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
When what I seek, my weary travel's end,
When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang
When you entombed in men's eyes shall lie.
When you have bid your servant once adieu;
When your sweet issue your sweet form should bear. 
Whence hast thou this becoming of things ill,
Where all the treasure of thy lusty days; 
Where art thou Muse that thou forget'st so long,
Where beauty's veil doth cover every blot
Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men.
Where cheeks need blood; in thee it is abus'd.
Where Cupid got new fire; my mistress' eyes.
Where I may not remove nor be remov'd.
Where thou art forced to break a twofold truth:--
Where time and outward form would show it dead.
Where wasteful Time debateth with decay
Where you may be, or your affairs suppose,
Wherein I should your great deserts repay,
Wherein it finds a joy above the rest:
Whereon the stars in secret influence comment;
Whereto all bonds do tie me day by day;
Whereto th' inviting time our fashion calls:
Whereto the judgment of my heart is tied?
Which alters when it alteration finds,
Which borrow'd from this holy fire of Love,
Which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish:
Which but to-day by feeding is allay'd,
Which by and by black night doth take away,
Which die for goodness, who have lived for crime.
Which erst from heat did canopy the herd,
Which eyes not yet created shall o'er-read;
Which for memorial still with thee shall stay.
Which for their habitation chose out thee,
Which from Love's fire took heat perpetual,
Which happies those that pay the willing loan;
Which hath not figur'd to thee my true spirit?
Which have no correspondence with true sight;
Which heavily he answers with a groan,
Which hides your life, and shows not half your parts. 
Which husbandry in honour might uphold,
Which I by lacking have supposed dead;
Which I new pay as if not paid before.
Which in my bosom's shop is hanging still,
Which in their wills count bad what I think good?
Which in thy breast doth live, as thine in me:
Which is not mix'd with seconds, knows no art,
Which labouring for invention bear amiss
Which, like a canker in the fragrant rose,
Which, like a jewel (hung in ghastly night,
Which like two spirits do suggest me still:
Which many legions of true hearts had warm'd;
Which my heart knows the wide world's common place?
Which nightly gulls him with intelligence,
Which on thy soft cheek for complexion dwells
Which parts the shore, where two contracted new
Which proves more short than waste or ruining?
Which, rank of goodness, would by ill be cur'd;
Which shall above that idle rank remain,
Which shall be most my glory being dumb;
Which should example where your equal grew.
Which should transport me farthest from your sight.
Which steals men's eyes and women's souls amazeth.
Which this, Time's pencil, or my pupil pen,
Which though it alter not love's sole effect,
Which three till now, never kept seat in one.
Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive, 
Which to repair should be thy chief desire.
Which, used, lives th' executor to be.
Which vulgar scandal stamp'd upon my brow;
Which works on leases of short-number'd hours,
While comments of your praise richly compil'd,
While he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes:
While shadows like to thee do mock my sight?
While thou dost breathe, that pour'st into my verse
Whilst he upon your soundless deep doth ride;
Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase,
Whilst I alone did call upon thy aid,
Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you,
Whilst I thy babe chase thee afar behind;
Whilst I, whom fortune of such triumph bars
Whilst it hath thought itself so blessed never!
Whilst, like a willing patient, I will drink,
Whilst many nymphs that vow'd chaste life to keep
Whilst my poor lips which should that harvest reap,
Whilst that this shadow doth such substance give
Who, all in one, one pleasing note do sing:
Who all their parts of me to thee did give,
Who art as black as hell, as dark as night.
Who even but now come back again, assur'd,
Who for thy self art so unprovident.
Who hast by waning grown, and therein show'st
Who hateth thee that I do call my friend,
Who heaven itself for ornament doth use
Who, in despite of view, is pleased to dote.
Who is it that says most, which can say more,
Who lead thee in their riot even there
Who leaves unsway'd the likeness of a man,
Who lets so fair a house fall to decay,
Who, moving others, are themselves as stone,
Who plead for love, and look for recompense,
Who taught thee how to make me love thee more,
Who will believe my verse in time to come,
Who with his fear is put beside his part,
Whoe'er keeps me, let my heart be his guard;
Whoever hath her wish, thou hast thy 'Will,'
Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee:
Whose action is no stronger than a flower?
Whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest,
Whose influence is thine, and born of thee:
Whose speechless song being many, seeming one,
Whose strength's abundance weakens his own heart;
Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken.
Wh'r we are mended, or wh'r better they,
Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day,
Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth,
Why is my verse so barren of new pride,
Why lov'st thou that which thou receiv'st not gladly,
Why of eyes' falsehood hast thou forged hooks,
Why should false painting imitate his cheek,
Why should he live, now Nature bankrupt is,
Why should my heart think that a several plot,
Why should poor beauty indirectly seek
Why so large cost, having so short a lease,
Why with the time do I not glance aside
Why write I still all one, ever the same,
Will be a tatter'd weed of small worth held: 
Will play the tyrants to the very same
Will sourly leave her till he have prevail'd?
'Will', will fulfil the treasure of thy love,
Wilt thou, whose will is large and spacious,
Wishing me like to one more rich in hope,
With all triumphant splendour on my brow;
With April's first-born flowers, and all things rare,
With beauty's treasure ere it be self-kill'd.
With eager compounds we our palate urge;
With insufficiency my heart to sway?
With lines and wrinkles; when his youthful morn
With means more blessed than my barren rhyme?
With mine own weakness, being best acquainted,
With my extern the outward honouring,
With my love's picture then my eye doth feast,
With others thou shouldst not abhor my state:
With shifting change, as is false women's fashion:
With sun and moon, with earth and sea's rich gems,
With thy sweet fingers when thou gently sway'st
With Time's injurious hand crush'd and o'erworn;
With ugly rack on his celestial face,
With virtuous wish would bear you living flowers,
With what I most enjoy contented least;
Within be fed, without be rich no more:
Within his bending sickle's compass come;
Within the gentle closure of my breast,
Within the knowledge of mine own desert,
Within thine own bud buriest thy content,
Without accusing you of injury. 
Without all bail shall carry me away,
Without all ornament, itself and true,
Without this folly, age, and cold decay:
Without thy help, by me be borne alone.
Wooing his purity with her foul pride.
Worthy perusal stand against thy sight;
Wound me not with thine eye, but with thy tongue:
Wretched in this alone, that thou mayst take
Yet be most proud of that which I compile,
Yet do not so; but since I am near slain, 
Yet, do thy worst old Time: despite thy wrong,
Yet doth it steal sweet hours from love's delight.
Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art,
Yet fear her, O thou minion of her pleasure!
Yet him for this my love no whit disdaineth;
Yet, in good faith, some say that thee behold,
Yet in these thoughts my self almost despising,
Yet mortal looks adore his beauty still,
Yet nor the lays of birds, nor the sweet smell
Yet seem'd it winter still, and you away,
Yet so they mourn becoming of their woe,
Yet then my judgment knew no reason why
Yet this abundant issue seem'd to me
Yet this shall I ne'er know, but live in doubt, 
Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise,
Yet what of thee thy poet doth invent
Yet what the best is take the worst to be.
Yet who knows not conscience is born of love?
You are my all-the-world, and I must strive
You are so strongly in my purpose bred,
You had a father: let your son say so.
You live in this, and dwell in lovers' eyes.
You should live twice,--in it, and in my rhyme.
You still shall live,--such virtue hath my pen,--
You to your beauteous blessings add a curse,
Your love and pity doth the impression fill,
Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
Your name from hence immortal life shall have,
Your own glass shows you when you look in it.
Your shallowest help will hold me up afloat,
Yourself again, after yourself's decease,
Yourself to pardon of self-doing crime.
