How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea,
Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea,
When others would give life, and bring a tomb.
Though yet heaven knows it is but as a tomb
To make him much outlive a gilded tomb
Or who is he so fond will be the tomb,
For where is she so fair whose unear'd womb
Because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb?
Which shall be most my glory being dumb;
It fears not policy, that heretic,
But all alone stands hugely politic, 
Now this ill-wresting world is grown so bad,
In days long since, before these last so bad.
Which I by lacking have supposed dead;
Before the golden tresses of the dead,
Above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead?
When all the breathers of this world are dead;
That all the world besides methinks are dead.
The prey of worms, my body being dead;
No longer mourn for me when I am dead
Ere you were born was beauty's summer dead.
Where time and outward form would show it dead.
To live a second life on second head;
If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head.
O me! what eyes hath Love put in my head,
But then begins a journey in my head
Mine own self-love quite contrary I read;
Great princes' favourites their fair leaves spread
Which eyes not yet created shall o'er-read;
O! him she stores, to show what wealth she had
Past reason hunted; and no sooner had,
This told, I joy; but then no longer glad,
On purpose laid to make the taker mad:
For, if I should despair, I should grow mad,
I send them back again, and straight grow sad.
When I have seen by Time's fell hand defac'd
And gilded honour shamefully misplac'd,
And right perfection wrongfully disgrac'd,
That I in thy abundance am suffic'd,
Weary with toil, I haste me to my bed,
Showing their birth, and where they did proceed?
I found, or thought I found, you did exceed
But when my glass shows me myself indeed
I never saw that you did painting need,
Till I return, of posting is no need.
Of my dull bearer when from thee I speed:
And keep invention in a noted weed,
Giving him aid, my verse astonished.
So dost thou too, and therein dignified.
That I may not be so, nor thou belied,
By self-example mayst thou be denied!
And in themselves their pride lies buried,
And all those friends which I thought buried.
Whereto the judgment of my heart is tied?
And strength by limping sway disabled
Give warning to the world that I am fled
Or, if they have, where is my judgment fled,
To side this title is impannelled
And by their verdict is determined
Coral is far more red, than her lips red:
Finding the first conceit of love there bred,
You are so strongly in my purpose bred,
For fear of which, hear this thou age unbred:
Too base of thee to be remembered,.
But at my mistress' eye Love's brand new-fired, 
To work my mind, when body's work's expired: 
I, sick withal, the help of bath desired,
On both sides thus is simple truth suppressed:
And by addition me of thee defeated,
And for a woman wert thou first created;
For all the day they view things unrespected;
And darkly bright, are bright in dark directed.
And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted,
Nor are mine ears with thy tongue's tune delighted;
Nor taste, nor smell, desire to be invited
A woman's face with nature's own hand painted,
Of faults conceal'd, wherein I am attainted;
A woman's gentle heart, but not acquainted
With mine own weakness, being best acquainted,
How have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted,
What wretched errors hath my heart committed,
Just to the time, not with the time exchang'd,
That is my home of love: if I have rang'd,
Either not assail'd, or victor being charg'd;
To tie up envy, evermore enlarg'd,
Whilst I alone did call upon thy aid,
Sweet love, renew thy force; be it not said
Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?
Shall Time's best jewel from Time's chest lie hid?
Will be a tatter'd weed of small worth held: 
My body is the frame wherein 'tis held,
And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field,
Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assail'd;
Will sourly leave her till he have prevail'd?
And precious phrase by all the Muses fil'd.
The second burthen of a former child!
After a thousand victories once foil'd,
And all the rest forgot for which he toil'd:
While comments of your praise richly compil'd,
Hath been before, how are our brains beguil'd,
Mine eye hath play'd the painter and hath stell'd,
With beauty's treasure ere it be self-kill'd.
In thee thy summer, ere thou be distill'd:
For as the sun is daily new and old,
To me, fair friend, you never can be old,
My glass shall not persuade me I am old,
And wherefore say not I that I am old?
What thou dost foist upon us that is old;
This were to be new made when thou art old,
Therefore to give them from me was I bold,
To say they err I dare not be so bold,
Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,
And barren rage of death's eternal cold?
Such seems your beauty still. Three winters cold,
And see thy blood warm when thou feel'st it cold.
For nothing hold me, so it please thee hold
That poor retention could not so much hold,
Yet, in good faith, some say that thee behold,
That time of year thou mayst in me behold
But when in thee time's furrows I behold,
Which husbandry in honour might uphold,
Than think that we before have heard them told.
So is my love still telling what is told.
And age in love, loves not to have years told:
Then in the number let me pass untold,
And the just pleasure lost, which is so deem'd
To truths translated, and for true things deem'd.
'Tis better to be vile than vile esteem'd,
The basest jewel will be well esteem'd,
And often is his gold complexion dimm'd,
By chance, or nature's changing course untrimm'd: 
Was, sleeping, by a virgin hand disarm'd.
Which many legions of true hearts had warm'd;
Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand.
Came tripping by; but in her maiden hand
To what it works in, like the dyer's hand:
To kiss the tender inward of thy hand,
The lily I condemned for thy hand,
Ah! yet doth beauty like a dial-hand,
For nimble thought can jump both sea and land,
Thence comes it that my name receives a brand,
Laid by his side his heart-inflaming brand,
The roses fearfully on thorns did stand,
No matter then although my foot did stand
At the wood's boldness by thee blushing stand!
So your sweet hue, which methinks still doth stand,
And yet to times in hope, my verse shall stand.
When in the least of them my life hath end.
But beauty's waste hath in the world an end,
'I hate' she alter'd with an end,
Now all is done, save what shall have no end:
So do our minutes hasten to their end;
When what I seek, my weary travel's end,
All losses are restor'd and sorrows end.
Eat up thy charge? Is this thy body's end?
Doth follow night, who like a fiend
And whether that my angel be turn'd fiend,
In true plain words, by thy true-telling friend;
But being both from me, both to each friend,
But if the while I think on thee, dear friend,
On newer proof, to try an older friend,
'Thus far the miles are measured from thy friend!'
Who hateth thee that I do call my friend,
Nature's bequest gives nothing, but doth lend,
What strained touches rhetoric can lend,
And you but one, can every shadow lend.
Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend;
Were it not sinful then, striving to mend,
Uttering bare truth, even so as foes commend.
Than that which on thy humour doth depend:
Look! what an unthrift in the world doth spend
Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend?
I have no precious time at all to spend;
Nay, if thou lour'st on me, do I not spend
Unthrifty loveliness, why dost thou spend
For to no other pass my verses tend
Being your slave what should I do but tend,
That millions of strange shadows on you tend?
In sequent toil all forwards do contend.
Never believe though in my nature reign'd,
That it could so preposterously be stain'd, 
Under that bond that him as fast doth bind.
Lest eyes well-seeing thy foul faults should find.
O! what a happy title do I find,
O! what excuse will my poor beast then find,
By oft predict that I in heaven find:
For thee, and for myself, no quiet find.
Commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find
A god in love, to whom I am confin'd.
Therefore my verse to constancy confin'd,
Whilst I thy babe chase thee afar behind;
That thou no form of thee hast left behind,
My grief lies onward, and my joy behind.
Be, as thy presence is, gracious and kind,
And play the mother's part, kiss me, be kind;
Then--churls--their thoughts, although their eyes were kind,
For thou art covetous, and he is kind;
Kind is my love to-day, to-morrow kind,
O cunning Love! with tears thou keep'st me blind,
Those that can see thou lov'st, and I am blind.
Doth part his function and is partly blind,
By children's eyes, her husband's shape in mind:
Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind,
To take a new acquaintance of thy mind.
They look into the beauty of thy mind,
But, love, hate on, for now I know thy mind,;
O! change thy thought, that I may change my mind:
Since I left you, mine eye is in my mind;
For that same groan doth put this in my mind,
Lo! thus, by day my limbs, by night my mind,
Mine appetite I never more will grind
Pointing to each his thunder, rain and wind,
Then should I spur, though mounted on the wind,
Three April perfumes in three hot Junes burn'd,
Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turn'd,
A maid of Dian's this advantage found,
As 'twixt a miser and his wealth is found.
In other accents do this praise confound
And Time that gave doth now his gift confound.
My mistress, when she walks, treads on the ground:
Or as sweet-season'd showers are to the ground;
In a cold valley-fountain of that ground;
That music hath a far more pleasing sound:
Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crown'd,
Thy outward thus with outward praise is crown'd;
To leave for nothing all thy sum of good;
Which in their wills count bad what I think good?
Give salutation to my sportive blood?
All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood,
And burn the long-liv'd phoenix, in her blood;
And make the earth devour her own sweet brood;
Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard,
Whoe'er keeps me, let my heart be his guard;
Prison my heart in thy steel bosom's ward, 
O! that our night of woe might have remember'd
And soon to you, as you to me, then tender'd
Which erst from heat did canopy the herd,
It might for Fortune's bastard be unfather'd,
Weeds among weeds, or flowers with flowers gather'd.
The dear respose for limbs with travel tir'd;
And found it in thy cheek: he can afford
He lends thee virtue, and he stole that word
In things right true my heart and eyes have err'd,
And to this false plague are they now transferr'd.
Which, rank of goodness, would by ill be cur'd;
Until life's composition be recur'd
The mortal moon hath her eclipse endur'd,
Who even but now come back again, assur'd,
Incertainties now crown themselves assur'd,
The ills that were not, grew to faults assur'd,
So then I am not lame, poor, nor despis'd,
And do so, love; yet when they have devis'd,
But day by night and night by day oppress'd,
More than that tongue that more hath more express'd.
I see their antique pen would have express'd
At random from the truth vainly express'd;
Featur'd like him, like him with friends possess'd,
Of thee, thy record never can be miss'd.
A torment thrice three-fold thus to be cross'd:
And my next self thou harder hast engross'd:
And their gross painting might be better us'd
Where cheeks need blood; in thee it is abus'd.
And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud.
And almost thence my nature is subdu'd
Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud:
Hath motion, and mine eye may be deceiv'd:
Steal from his figure, and no pace perceiv'd;
I never writ, nor no man ever lov'd.
Then happy I, that love and am belov'd,
Where I may not remove nor be remov'd.
If this be error and upon me prov'd,
Pity me, then, and wish I were renew'd;
'Truth needs no colour, with his colour fix'd;
But best is best, if never intermix'd'?
But now my gracious numbers are decay'd,
Which but to-day by feeding is allay'd,
In my love's veins thou hast too grossly dy'd.
For thy neglect of truth in beauty dy'd?
For as you were when first your eye I ey'd,
When sometime lofty towers I see down-raz'd,
Thou truly fair, wert truly sympathiz'd
And arts with thy sweet graces graced be;
Thy pity may deserve to pitied be.
Mad slanderers by mad ears believed be.
As soon as think the place where he would be.
And in our faults by lies we flatter'd be.
Let this sad interim like the ocean be
Pity the world, or else this glutton be,
He is contented thy poor drudge to be,
Thy proud heart's slave and vassal wretch to be:
Which, used, lives th' executor to be.
And to be prais'd of ages yet to be.
But if thou live, remember'd not to be,
Yet what the best is take the worst to be.
This I do vow and this shall ever be;
Since all alike my songs and praises be
Of more delight than hawks and horses be;
Whate'er thy thoughts, or thy heart's workings be,
Have put on black and loving mourners be,
Her audit (though delayed) answered must be,
But slave to slavery my sweet'st friend must be?
Though in thy store's account I one must be;
That I an accessary needs must be,
To put fair truth upon so foul a face?
Look in your glass, and there appears a face
Fairing the foul with Art's false borrowed face,
With ugly rack on his celestial face,
To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face,
To follow that which flies before her face,
Like a deceived husband; so love's face
As those two mourning eyes become thy face:
A thousand groans, but thinking on thy face,
Then let not winter's ragged hand deface,
Make sweet some vial; treasure thou some place
Which my heart knows the wide world's common place?
And my sick Muse doth give an other place.
Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place:
Nor gives to necessary wrinkles place,
Thy black is fairest in my judgment's place.
Then can no horse with my desire keep pace;
Shall neigh--no dull flesh--in his fiery race;
To mourn for me since mourning doth thee grace,
My verse alone had all thy gentle grace;
That heals the wound, and cures not the disgrace:
Dulling my lines, and doing me disgrace.
But is profan'd, if not lives in disgrace.
Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace: 
As high as learning, my rude ignorance.
But thou art all my art, and dost advance
And nothing 'gainst Time's scythe can make defence
Against thy reasons making no defence.
And I will comment upon that offence:
Thus can my love excuse the slow offence
Which nightly gulls him with intelligence,
Save breed, to brave him when he takes thee hence.
From where thou art why should I haste me thence?
I was not sick of any fear from thence:
Others, but stewards of their excellence.
Still constant in a wondrous excellence;
And 'gainst myself a lawful plea commence:
One thing expressing, leaves out difference.
O! let my looks be then the eloquence
Some in their wealth, some in their body's force,
They live unwoo'd, and unrespected fade;
But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
Since every one, hath every one, one shade,
Nor shall death brag thou wander'st in his shade,
When in dead night thy fair imperfect shade
But love, for love, thus shall excuse my jade,--
How would, I say, mine eyes be blessed made
Therefore desire, of perfect'st love being made,
Of their sweet deaths, are sweetest odours made: 
What is your substance, whereof are you made,
Is more than my o'erpress'd defence can bide?
For then my thoughts--from far where I abide--
Are both with thee, wherever I abide;
And from the forlorn world his visage hide,
Or as the wardrobe which the robe doth hide,
That sometimes anger thrusts into his hide,
If thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide,
O! for my sake do you with Fortune chide,
The forward violet thus did I chide:
These present-absent with swift motion slide.
Whilst he upon your soundless deep doth ride;
Be anchor'd in the bay where all men ride,
Anon permit the basest clouds to ride
By new unfolding his imprison'd pride.
If not from my love's breath? The purple pride
Wooing his purity with her foul pride.
That having such a scope to show her pride,
As his triumphant prize. Proud of this pride,
Have from the forests shook three summers' pride,
Why is my verse so barren of new pride,
He of tall building, and of goodly pride:
More sharp to me than spurring to his side;
To stand in thy affairs, fall by thy side.
Tempteth my better angel from my side,
Why with the time do I not glance aside
Dear heart, forbear to glance thine eye aside:
Than when it hath my added praise beside!
That did not better for my life provide
And keep my drooping eyelids open wide,
Bear thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart go wide.
But that your trespass now becomes a fee;
I will be true despite thy scythe and thee.
To eat the world's due, by the grave and thee.
If ten of thine ten times refigur'd thee:
All days are nights to see till I see thee,
I may not evermore acknowledge thee,
Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee:
And what is't but mine own when I praise thee?
But why of two oaths' breach do I accuse thee, 
For all my vows are oaths but to misuse thee,
Then may I dare to boast how I do love thee;
More worthy I to be belov'd of thee.
And in my madness might speak ill of thee;
Whose influence is thine, and born of thee:
Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee,
Thy unused beauty must be tombed with thee,
Die single and thine image dies with thee.
And I am still with them, and they with thee;
By those swift messengers return'd from thee,
Upon the farthest earth remov'd from thee;
His rider lov'd not speed, being made from thee:
How far I toil, still farther off from thee. 
But sweet, or colour it had stol'n from thee.
So runn'st thou after that which flies from thee, 
Is it thy spirit that thou send'st from thee
Thou art thy mother's glass and she in thee
Look what is best, that best I wish in thee:
Excuse not silence so, for't lies in thee
And yet thou wilt; for I, being pent in thee,
Their images I lov'd, I view in thee,
But when I sleep, in dreams they look on thee,
Delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee; 
For bending all my loving thoughts on thee,
For summer and his pleasures wait on thee,
So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.
Intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee,
The very part was consecrate to thee:
For who's so dumb that cannot write to thee,
In tender embassy of love to thee,
Hers by thy beauty tempting her to thee,
That nothing me, a something sweet to thee:
To keep an adjunct to remember thee
And her quietus is to render thee.
That's for thy self to breed another thee,
For all that beauty that doth cover thee,
That beauty still may live in thine or thee.
But mutual render, only me for thee.
Which for their habitation chose out thee,
But rising at thy name doth point out thee,
But heaven in thy creation did decree
But thou wilt not, nor he will not be free,
And being frank she lends to those are free:
He pays the whole, and yet am I not free.
And take thou my oblation, poor but free,
More flowers I noted, yet I none could see,
So long as men can breathe, or eyes can see,
And all things turns to fair that eyes can see!
Looking on darkness which the blind do see:
So thou through windows of thine age shalt see,
When most I wink, then do mine eyes best see,
Or made them swear against the thing they see;
Come daily to the banks, that when they see
That they behold, and see not what they see?
That thou consum'st thy self in single life?
So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life,
So are you to my thoughts as food to life,
Give my love fame faster than Time wastes life,
My sweet love's beauty, though my lover's life:
So thou prevent'st his scythe and crooked knife.
Against confounding age's cruel knife,
The coward conquest of a wretch's knife,
And for the peace of you I hold such strife
The world will wail thee like a makeless wife;
The rich-proud cost of outworn buried age;
Resembling strong youth in his middle age,
Weighs not the dust and injury of age,
'Had my friend's Muse grown with this growing age,
So should my papers, yellow'd with their age,
And peace proclaims olives of endless age.
Lord of my love, to whom in vassalage
Attending on his golden pilgrimage:
But makes antiquity for aye his page;
To march in ranks of better equipage:
Or some fierce thing replete with too much rage,
And brass eternal slave to mortal rage;
And your true rights be term'd a poet's rage
And the sad augurs mock their own presage;
To thee I send this written embassage,
As an unperfect actor on the stage,
The hardest knife ill-us'd doth lose his edge.
Take heed, dear heart, of this large privilege;
To set a form upon desired change,
So far from variation or quick change?
No, Time, thou shalt not boast that I do change:
Therefore in that I cannot know thy change.
To me are nothing novel, nothing strange;
I will acquaintance strangle, and look strange;
To new-found methods, and to compounds strange?
Is writ in moods, and frowns, and wrinkles strange. 
With eager compounds we our palate urge;
We sicken to shun sickness when we purge;
Though to itself, it only live and die,
Ah! if thou issueless shalt hap to die,
Happy to have thy love, happy to die!
That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
Though I, once gone, to all the world must die:
Thou shouldst print more, not let that copy die.
For at a frown they in their glory die.
To swear against the truth so foul a lie.!
But things remov'd that hidden in thee lie!
For thy records and what we see doth lie,
That on the ashes of his youth doth lie,
Since that my life on thy revolt doth lie.
As from my soul which in thy breast doth lie:
When you entombed in men's eyes shall lie.
Those lines that I before have writ do lie,
Unless you would devise some virtuous lie,
My heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie,--
All this away, and me most wretchcd make.
Those lips that Love's own hand did make,
Then of thy beauty do I question make,
Or I shall live your epitaph to make,
To me that languish'd for her sake:
To play the watchman ever for thy sake:
Am of my self, all tyrant, for thy sake?
And sue a friend came debtor for my sake;
Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake
The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take,
From hence your memory death cannot take,
Wretched in this alone, that thou mayst take
When I against myself with thee partake?
It is my love that keeps mine eye awake:
Hiding thy bravery in their rotten smoke?
Such cherubins as your sweet self resemble,
As fast as objects to his beams assemble?
Yet be most proud of that which I compile,
In others' works thou dost but mend the style,
For that deep wound it gives my friend and me!
Him have I lost; thou hast both him and me:
And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me.
Doing thee vantage, double-vantage me.
Even that your pity is enough to cure me.
Do in consent shake hands to torture me,
And for my sake even so doth she abuse me,
Till then, not show my head where thou mayst prove me.
Make thee another self for love of me,
And thou--all they--hast all the all of me.
My spirit is thine, the better part of me:
When thou art all the better part of me?
Thine eyes I love, and they, as pitying me,
Therefore I lie with her, and she with me,
Thy self away, art present still with me;
To that sweet thief which sourly robs from me.
Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransom me.
Which in thy breast doth live, as thine in me:
If thy unworthiness rais'd love in me,
Perforce am thine, and all that is in me.
To find out shames and idle hours in me,
Were to import forgetfulness in me.
Plods dully on, to bear that weight in me,
O! give thy self the thanks, if aught in me
Yet this abundant issue seem'd to me
Thine by thy beauty being false to me.
Thy love is better than high birth to me,
But if thou catch thy hope, turn back to me,
Of thy fair health, recounting it to me:
Mine eyes have drawn thy shape, and thine for me
He learn'd but surety-like to write for me,
Nor thou with public kindness honour me,
This wish I have; then ten times happy me!
To make me tongue-tied speaking of your fame!
And beauty slander'd with a bastard shame:
Lest my bewailed guilt should do thee shame,
How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame
The expense of spirit in a waste of shame
Is perjur'd, murderous, bloody, full of blame,
Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name!
Even as when first I hallow'd thy fair name.
Knowing a better spirit doth use your name,
Or if it were, it bore not beauty's name;
Unless thou take that honour from thy name:
That every word doth almost tell my name,
Those hours, that with gentle work did frame
To this composed wonder of your frame;
Or whether revolution be the same. 
Why write I still all one, ever the same,
Will play the tyrants to the very same
I must each day say o'er the very same;
Had, having, and in quest, to have extreme;
And beauty making beautiful old rime,
Since, spite of him, I'll live in this poor rime,
Yourself to pardon of self-doing crime.
Which die for goodness, who have lived for crime.
To weigh how once I suffer'd in your crime.
But I forbid thee one most heinous crime:
And thou present'st a pure unstained prime.
Bearing the wanton burden of the prime,
Calls back the lovely April of her prime;
When I behold the violet past prime,
And do whate'er thou wilt, swift-footed Time,
When in the chronicle of wasted time
Compare them with the bett'ring of the time,
When I do count the clock that tells the time,
Thy worth the greater being woo'd of time;
As I by yours, you've pass'd a hell of time;
To this I witness call the fools of time,
Than unswept stone, besmear'd with sluttish time.
Despite of wrinkles this thy golden time.
That you yourself may privilage your time
And yet this time removed was summer's time;
But were some child of yours alive that time,
Make war upon this bloody tyrant, Time?
Now with the drops of this most balmy time,
Against that time, if ever that time come,
Who will believe my verse in time to come,
Of the wide world dreaming on things to come,
Within his bending sickle's compass come;
Straight in her heart did mercy come,
Of princes, shall outlive this powerful rhyme;
With means more blessed than my barren rhyme?
Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme,
You should live twice,--in it, and in my rhyme.
And for myself mine own worth do define,
Even so my sun one early morn did shine,
And in my will no fair acceptance shine?
For it depends upon that love of thine. 
Or, if it do, not from those lips of thine, 
But that I hope some good conceit of thine
Counting no old thing old, thou mine, I thine, 
Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine?
Proving his beauty by succession thine!
So, now I have confess'd that he is thine,
But when your countenance fill'd up his line,
Then lacked I matter; that enfeebled mine.
For term of life thou art assured mine;
If thou couldst answer 'This fair child of mine
Myself I'll forfeit, so that other mine
But out! alack! he was but one hour mine,
Duty so great, which wit so poor as mine
Methinks no face so gracious is as mine,
And seal'd false bonds of love as oft as mine,
Nothing, sweet boy; but yet, like prayers divine,
And our dear love lose name of single one,
But here's the joy; my friend and I are one;
Although our undivided loves are one:
Whose speechless song being many, seeming one,
Ay, fill it full with wills, and my will one.
Which three till now, never kept seat in one.
Or ten times happier, be it ten for one;
Now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done:
Since mind at first in character was done!
No more be griev'd at that which thou hast done:
Tir'd with all these, from these would I be gone,
Then how when nature calls thee to be gone,
For when these quicker elements are gone
Sap checked with frost, and lusty leaves quite gone,
And mock you with me after I am gone.
Hung with the trophies of my lovers gone,
To leap large lengths of miles when thou art gone,
Then can I grieve at grievances foregone,
Fair, kind, and true, have often liv'd alone,
To any sensual feast with thee alone:
Is't not enough to torture me alone,
Sweet flattery! then she loves but me alone.
That due of many now is thine alone:
Without thy help, by me be borne alone.
Save that, to die, I leave my love alone.
For having traffic with thy self alone,
Although I swear it to myself alone.
My life, being made of four, with two alone
That due to thee which thou deserv'st alone.
Now counting best to be with you alone,
Among a number one is reckon'd none:
Sings this to thee: 'Thou single wilt prove none.'
They that have power to hurt, and will do none,
Nor tender feeling, to base touches prone,
Who, moving others, are themselves as stone,
And weep afresh love's long since cancell'd woe,
Come in the rearward of a conquer'd woe;
And other strains of woe, which now seem woe,
Yet so they mourn becoming of their woe,
But heavy tears, badges of either's woe.
If thinking on me then should make you woe.
The beast that bears me, tired with my woe,
A bliss in proof,-- and prov'd, a very woe;
Blessed are you whose worthiness gives scope,
Desiring this man's art, and that man's scope,
Wishing me like to one more rich in hope,
Being had, to triumph; being lacked, to hope.
Like stones of worth they thinly placed are,
To critic and to flatterer stopped are.
The eyes, 'fore duteous, now converted are
But thou, to whom my jewels trifles are,
My thoughts and my discourse as madmen's are,
Excusing thy sins more than thy sins are;
O! that you were your self; but, love you are
Or call it winter, which being full of care,
In so profound abysm I throw all care
Past cure I am, now Reason is past care,
Thou best of dearest, and mine only care,
Against this coming end you should prepare,
Making a couplement of proud compare'
As any she belied with false compare.
Authorizing thy trespass with compare,
Makes summer's welcome, thrice more wished, more rare.
Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare,
And yet by heaven, I think my love as rare,
With April's first-born flowers, and all things rare,
Against that time do I ensconce me here,
And will, thy soul knows, is admitted there;
Alas! 'tis true, I have gone here and there,
To hideous winter, and confounds him there;
If Time have any wrinkle graven there;
Who lead thee in their riot even there
Making his style admired every where.
And make time's spoils despised every where.
The owner's tongue doth publish every where.
Beauty o'er-snowed and bareness every where:
For thee watch I, whilst thou dost wake elsewhere,
What old December's bareness everywhere! 
If I might teach thee wit, better it were,
Find no determination; then you were
The other two, slight air, and purging fire
In me thou see'st the glowing of such fire,
The fairest votary took up that fire
Our dates are brief, and therefore we admire
That 'gainst thy self thou stick'st not to conspire,
As the death-bed, whereon it must expire,
Which to repair should be thy chief desire.
And rather make them born to our desire
Upon the hours, and times of your desire?
And so the general of hot desire
The first my thought, the other my desire,
Nor services to do, till you require. 
Nor need I tallies thy dear love to score;
Which I new pay as if not paid before.
Though words come hindmost, holds his rank before.
Each changing place with that which goes before,
What hast thou then more than thou hadst before?
Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore,
Advantage on the kingdom of the shore,
Look, whom she best endow'd, she gave thee more;
To trust those tables that receive thee more:
Who taught thee how to make me love thee more,
And to the most of praise add something more;
One will of mine, to make thy large will more.
Within be fed, without be rich no more:
Or any of these all, or all, or more,
All mine was thine, before thou hadst this more.
Who is it that says most, which can say more,
In whose confine immured is the store
And him as for a map doth Nature store,
Increasing store with loss, and loss with store;
Let those whom nature hath not made for store,
And in abundance addeth to his store;
I make my love engrafted, to this store:
And let that pine to aggravate thy store;
To show false Art what beauty was of yore.
Against strange maladies a sovereign cure.
A dateless lively heat, still to endure,
I should in thought control your times of pleasure,
For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure. 
Yet fear her, O thou minion of her pleasure!
But since she prick'd thee out for women's pleasure,
And every humour hath his adjunct pleasure,
Then better'd that the world may see my pleasure:
But these particulars are not my measure,
Can bring him to his sweet up-locked treasure,
She may detain, but not still keep, her treasure:
Mine be thy love and thy love's use their treasure.
Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure;
Being your vassal, bound to stay your leisure!
The crow, or dove, it shapes them to your feature.
The most sweet favour or deformed'st creature,
So that eternal love in love's fresh case,
If all were minded so, the times should cease
But as the riper should by time decease,
Like widow'd wombs after their lords' decease:
Yourself again, after yourself's decease,
Why so large cost, having so short a lease,
So should that beauty which you hold in lease
The uncertain sickly appetite to please.
Vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease,
Herein lives wisdom, beauty, and increase;
From fairest creatures we desire increase,
The teeming autumn, big with rich increase,
When I perceive that men as plants increase,
For that which longer nurseth the disease;
Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase,
The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise.
Cannot dispraise, but in a kind of praise;
To subjects worse have given admiring praise.
'Tis thee,--myself,--that for myself I praise,
Have eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise.
Were an all-eating shame, and thriftless praise.
Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise,
Finding thy worth a limit past my praise;
That is so proud thy service to despise,
But 'tis my heart that loves what they despise,
So, till the judgment that yourself arise,
Than both your poets can in praise devise.
Who plead for love, and look for recompense,
Mark how with my neglect I do dispense:
And husband nature's riches from expense;
For to thy sensual fault I bring in sense,--
Of others' voices, that my adder's sense
Save, where you are, how happy you make those.
Drawn after you, you pattern of all those.
Be it lawful I love thee, as thou lov'st those
But weep to have, that which it fears to lose.
O! in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose.
This thought is as a death which cannot choose
Where you may be, or your affairs suppose,
Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose;
Which, like a canker in the fragrant rose,
Do not so much as my poor name rehearse;
And every fair with his fair doth rehearse,
And tongues to be, your being shall rehearse,
For every vulgar paper to rehearse?
That did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearse,
And under thee their poesy disperse.
Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
Stirr'd by a painted beauty to his verse,
O! if,--I say you look upon this verse,
Was it the proud full sail of his great verse,
And found such fair assistance in my verse
While thou dost breathe, that pour'st into my verse
Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse;
Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse.
You to your beauteous blessings add a curse,
Who heaven itself for ornament doth use
Thou usurer, that putt'st forth all to use,
The dedicated words which writers use
How much more praise deserv'd thy beauty's use,
Profitless usurer, why dost thou use
As every alien pen hath got my use
Since why to love I can allege no cause.
So him I lose through my unkind abuse.
Then, beauteous niggard, why dost thou abuse
Shall sum my count, and make my old excuse,'
So is it not with me as with that Muse,
I grant thou wert not married to my Muse,
So oft have I invoked thee for my Muse,
For thee, against my self I'll vow debate,
Or else of thee this I prognosticate:
Thy adverse party is thy advocate,--
Than those old nine which rhymers invocate;
And summer's lease hath all too short a date:
'Thy end is truth's and beauty's doom and date.'
So long as youth and thou are of one date;
Eternal numbers to outlive long date.
And look upon myself, and curse my fate,
From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven's gate,;
Such civil war is in my love and hate,
But shoot not at me in your waken'd hate;
Love is my sin, and thy dear virtue hate,
The more I hear and see just cause of hate?
Breathed forth the sound that said 'I hate',
As subject to Time's love or to Time's hate,
For thou art so possess'd with murderous hate,
For I must ne'er love him whom thou dost hate.
Then look I death my days should expiate. 
If like a lamb he could his looks translate!
And on just proof surmise, accumulate;
And like enough thou know'st thy estimate,
My bonds in thee are all determinate.
Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate--
Seeking that beauteous roof to ruinate
Thus policy in love, to anticipate
Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
If my dear love were but the child of state,
When I have seen such interchange of state,
But when she saw my woeful state,
And brought to medicine a healthful state
O! but with mine compare thou thine own state,
To be so tickled, they would change their state 
I all alone beweep my outcast state,
if thou wouldst use the strength of all thy state!
Haply I think on thee,-- and then my state,
With others thou shouldst not abhor my state:
O! lest the world should task you to recite
I have seen roses damask'd, red and white,
And sable curls, all silvered o'er with white; 
Nor did I wonder at the lily's white,
Though in our lives a separable spite,
When other petty griefs have done their spite,
So I, made lame by Fortune's dearest spite,
The perfect ceremony of love's rite,
O! blame me not, if I no more can write!
O! how I faint when I of you do write,
Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write,
O! let me, true in love, but truly write,
Thy edge should blunter be than appetite,
Is from the book of honour razed quite,
After my death,--dear love, forget me quite,
That over-goes my blunt invention quite, 
Who, in despite of view, is pleased to dote.
If that be fair whereon my false eyes dote,
For they in thee a thousand errors note;
If it be not, then love doth well denote
Made more or less by thy continual haste.
But in the onset come: so shall I taste
And of this book, this learning mayst thou taste. 
And with old woes new wail my dear time's waste:
Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste;
And, thou away, the very birds are mute:
For I impair not beauty being mute,
This silence for my sin you did impute,
The earth can have but earth, which is his due;
All tongues--the voice of souls--give thee that due,
Simply I credit her false-speaking tongue:
Be scorn'd, like old men of less truth than tongue,
To know my shames and praises from your tongue;
Wound me not with thine eye, but with thy tongue:
Therefore like her, I sometime hold my tongue:
Be absent from thy walks; and in my tongue
And steel dead seeming of his living hue?
Of different flowers in odour and in hue,
Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue,
Without all ornament, itself and true,
O benefit of ill! now I find true
How can it? O! how can Love's eye be true, 
Or whether shall I say, mine eye saith true,
But thence I learn and find the lesson true,
Roses of shadow, since his rose is true?
Hearing you praised, I say ''tis so, 'tis true,'
So shall I live, supposing thou art true,
That you for love speak well of me untrue,
My most true mind thus maketh mine untrue.
Were it not thy sour leisure gave sweet leave,
What acceptable audit canst thou leave?
Your name from hence immortal life shall have,
That god forbid, that made me first your slave,
Or at your hand the account of hours to crave,
The earth can yield me but a common grave,
That sin by him advantage should achieve,
Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive, 
Thou of thy self thy sweet self dost deceive:
Who all their parts of me to thee did give,
Whilst that this shadow doth such substance give
From thy behaviour; beauty doth he give,
By that sweet ornament which truth doth give.
The bounteous largess given thee to give?
And your sweet semblance to some other give:
That by this separation I may give
Even for this, let us divided live,
Ah! wherefore with infection should he live,
No longer yours, than you your self here live:
No praise to thee, but what in thee doth live. 
Thou art the grave where buried love doth live,
For that sweet odour, which doth in it live.
So great a sum of sums, yet canst not live?
And by a part of all thy glory live.
None else to me, nor I to none alive,
But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive,
As 'Truth and beauty shall together thrive,
You are my all-the-world, and I must strive
Askance and strangely; but, by all above,
What merit lived in me, that you should love
Shall hate be fairer lodg'd than gentle love?
Which borrow'd from this holy fire of Love,
Yet who knows not conscience is born of love?
To entertain the time with thoughts of love,
And worse essays prov'd thee my best of love.
For canker vice the sweetest buds doth love,
The constancy and virtue of your love.
Theirs for their style I'll read, his for his love'.
Admit impediments. Love is not love
Love's fire heats water, water cools not love.
'Will', will fulfil the treasure of thy love,
My reason, the physician to my love, 
So, either by thy picture or my love,
For thou not farther than my thoughts canst move,
Or bends with the remover to remove:
Or to thyself at least kind-hearted prove:
In things of great receipt with ease we prove
Lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove:
Came there for cure and this by that I prove, 
And grew a seeting bath, which yet men prove
Since my appeal says I did strive to prove
But since he died and poets better prove,
O absence! what a torment wouldst thou prove,
For you in me can nothing worthy prove;
So thou be good, slander doth but approve
Hath left me, and I desperate now approve
Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe.
Pity me then, dear friend, and I assure ye,
Loving offenders thus I will excuse ye:
The canker blooms have full as deep a dye
For there can live no hatred in thine eye,
And scarcely greet me with that sun, thine eye,
Sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye
Hath dear religious love stol'n from mine eye,
Flatter the mountain tops with sovereign eye,
Lifts up his burning head, each under eye
But as the marigold at the sun's eye,
Is it for fear to wet a widow's eye,
That she hath thee is of my wailing chief,
I do forgive thy robbery, gentle thief,
Art left the prey of every vulgar thief. 
The offender's sorrow lends but weak relief
And yet, love knows it is a greater grief
Most worthy comfort, now my greatest grief,
That thou hast her it is not all my grief,
Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief;
When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang
Bare ruin'd choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.
To bitter sauces did I frame my feeding;
To be diseas'd, ere that there was true needing.
And tender churl mak'st waste in niggarding:
When not to be receives reproach of being;
Mine eye well knows what with his gust is 'greeing, 
Not by our feeling, but by others' seeing:
O! 'tis the first, 'tis flattery in my seeing,
Hath put a spirit of youth in every thing,
By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.
And all those beauties whereof now he's king
Comes home again, on better judgement making.
Or me to whom thou gav'st it, else mistaking;
An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling,
A man in hue all 'hues' in his controlling,
My love is strengthen'd, though more weak in seeming;
That love is merchandiz'd, whose rich esteeming,
Which proves more short than waste or ruining?
In vowing new hate after new love bearing:
But thou art twice forsworn, to me love swearing;
What can mine own praise to mine own self bring?
Strikes each in each by mutual ordering;
From you have I been absent in the spring,
Our love was new, and then but in the spring,
Stealing away the treasure of his spring; 
And only herald to the gaudy spring,
Of this our time, all you prefiguring;
With my extern the outward honouring,
As Philomel in summer's front doth sing,
O! how thy worth with manners may I sing,
Who, all in one, one pleasing note do sing:
Thine eyes, that taught the dumb on high to sing
They had not skill enough your worth to sing:
The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing;
Yet in these thoughts my self almost despising,
Like to the lark at break of day arising
Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing,
For how do I hold thee but by thy granting?
The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting,
Till Nature, as she wrought thee, fell a-doting,
And puts apparel on my tatter'd loving,
Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving:
Till whatsoever star that guides my moving,
And thou shalt find it merits not reproving;
And for that riches where is my deserving?
And so my patent back again is swerving.
Have added feathers to the learned's wing
Thy self thou gav'st, thy own worth then not knowing,
So thy great gift, upon misprision growing,
To love that well, which thou must leave ere long.
Where art thou Muse that thou forget'st so long,
To what you will; to you it doth belong
Such is my love, to thee I so belong,
This thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong,
Be where you list, your charter is so strong
O! call not me to justify the wrong
That for thy right, myself will bear all wrong.
That my steel'd sense or changes right or wrong.
Lest I, too much profane, should do it wrong,
Yet, do thy worst old Time: despite thy wrong,
And stretched metre of an antique song:
Spend'st thou thy fury on some worthless song,
Because I would not dull you with my song.
Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,
My love shall in my verse ever live young.
Nor his own vision holds what it doth catch;
Lo, as a careful housewife runs to catch
Of bird, of flower, or shape which it doth latch:
Sets down her babe, and makes all swift dispatch
But that wild music burthens every bough,
Which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish:
Harsh, featureless, and rude, barrenly perish:
A vengeful canker eat him up to death.
And to his robbery had annex'd thy breath;
Yet him for this my love no whit disdaineth;
Suns of the world may stain when heaven's sun staineth.
Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth;
Which steals men's eyes and women's souls amazeth.
A third, nor red nor white, had stol'n of both,
Poor soul, the centre of my sinful earth, 
Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth,
For I am shamed by that which I bring forth,
And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth
Alack! what poverty my Muse brings forth,
The argument, all bare, is of more worth
And so should you, to love things nothing worth.
Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth
That she might think me some untutor'd youth,
To see his active child do deeds of youth,
And chide thy beauty and thy straying youth,
Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth
These blenches gave my heart another youth,
And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth,
Where thou art forced to break a twofold truth:--
Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth; 
When my love swears that she is made of truth,
Most true it is, that I have look'd on truth
When that shall vade, by verse distills your truth.
Feeds on the rarities of nature's truth,
But, for his theft, in pride of all his growth 
And hang more praise upon deceased I
For I have sworn thee fair; more perjur'd I,
For no man well of such a salve can speak,
'Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break,
And make me travel forth without my cloak,
As thou goest onwards, still will pluck thee back,
Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back?
And all they foul that thy complexion lack.
At such who, not born fair, no beauty lack,
O fearful meditation! where, alack,
Therefore my mistress' eyes are raven black,
Then will I swear beauty herself is black,
If Nature, sovereign mistress over wrack,
O! let me suffer, being at your beck,
And patience, tame to sufferance, bide each check,
But not to tell of good or evil luck,
Not from the stars do I my judgement pluck;
Why should false painting imitate his cheek,
Why should poor beauty indirectly seek
No bitterness that I will bitter think,
Whilst, like a willing patient, I will drink,
Show me your image in some antique book,
Shall profit thee and much enrich thy book.
Of their fair subject, blessing every book. 
And by and by clean starved for a look;
When that mine eye is famish'd for a look,
O! that record could with a backward look,
These offices, so oft as thou wilt look,
And therefore mayst without attaint o'erlook
Save what is had, or must from you be took.
Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is took,
It is the star to every wandering bark,
O, no! it is an ever-fixed mark,
Which from Love's fire took heat perpetual,
And that unfair which fairly doth excel;
And for that sorrow, which I then did feel,
Unless my nerves were brass or hammer'd steel.
Feed'st thy light's flame with self-substantial fuel,
As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel;
Thy self thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel:
I may be straight though they themselves be bevel;
No, I am that I am, and they that level
Thou art the fairest and most precious jewel.
But then my friend's heart let my poor heart bail;
Thou canst not then use rigour in my jail:
Thus far for love, my love-suit, sweet, fulfil.
To win me soon to hell, my female evil,
And would corrupt my saint to be a devil,
Accuse me thus: that I have scanted all,
Take all my loves, my love, yea take them all;
Save thou, my rose, in it thou art my all.
No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call;
For nothing this wide universe I call,
No want of conscience hold it that I call
Forgot upon your dearest love to call, 
Her 'love,' for whose dear love I rise and fall.
For men diseas'd; but I, my mistress' thrall,
Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell
I am to wait, though waiting so be hell,
To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.
I guess one angel in another's hell:
Yet nor the lays of birds, nor the sweet smell
I will not praise that purpose not to sell.
And haply of our old acquaintance tell. 
But he that writes of you, if he can tell
Than of your graces and your gifts to tell;
Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell,
Thy looks should nothing thence, but sweetness tell.
Suspect I may, yet not directly tell;
Could make me any summer's story tell,
Or say with princes if it shall go well
Not blame your pleasure be it ill or well.
To mar the subject that before was well?
All this the world well knows; yet none knows well
Let them say more that like of hearsay well;
The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell,
Lean penury within that pen doth dwell
Thy sweet beloved name no more shall dwell,
From this vile world with vilest worms to dwell:
That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell;
Some in their garments though new-fangled ill;
The worser spirit a woman colour'd ill.
Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill,
As tender nurse her babe from faring ill.
And captive good attending captain ill:
Though you do anything, he thinks no ill.
Thou canst not love disgrace me half so ill,
For what care I who calls me well or ill, 
Whence hast thou this becoming of things ill,
Your love and pity doth the impression fill,
So, love, be thou, although to-day thou fill
And having climb'd the steep-up heavenly hill,
May time disgrace and wretched minutes kill.
Let no unkind 'No' fair beseechers kill;
To-morrow see again, and do not kill
There is such strength and warrantise of skill,
And folly--doctor-like--controlling skill,
She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill
Some glory in their birth, some in their skill,
For through the painter must you see his skill,
And you must live, drawn by your own sweet skill.
More than enough am I that vex'd thee still,
Which like two spirits do suggest me still:
To give away yourself, keeps yourself still,
Which in my bosom's shop is hanging still,
My love is as a fever longing still,
If thou turn back and my loud crying still.
The sea, all water, yet receives rain still,
My tongue-tied Muse in manners holds her still,
Make but my name thy love, and love that still,
Thou wilt restore to be my comfort still:
Yet mortal looks adore his beauty still,
Reserve their character with golden quill,
As I, not for myself, but for thee will;
Think all but one, and me in that one 'Will.'
So true a fool is love, that in your will,
And then thou lov'st me for my name is 'Will.'
So will I pray that thou mayst have thy 'Will,'
As I'll myself disgrace; knowing thy will,
So thou, being rich in 'Will,' add to thy 'Will'
And I my self am mortgag'd to thy will,
Swear to thy blind soul that I was thy 'Will',
Whoever hath her wish, thou hast thy 'Will,'
Can yet the lease of my true love control, 
When most impeach'd, stands least in thy control.
Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul
Hence, thou suborned informer! a true soul
Before, a joy propos'd; behind a dream.
The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem
Return forgetful Muse, and straight redeem,
Her eyes so suited, and they mourners seem
O! how much more doth beauty beauteous seem
Sland'ring creation with a false esteem:
Sing to the ear that doth thy lays esteem
That heavy Saturn laugh'd and leap'd with him.
When proud-pied April, dress'd in all his trim,
Supposed as forfeit to a confin'd doom.
Was us'd in giving gentle doom;
But bears it out even to the edge of doom.
That wear this world out to the ending doom.
Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room
When as thy love hath cast his utmost sum,
But my five wits nor my five senses can
Who leaves unsway'd the likeness of a man,
Which happies those that pay the willing loan;
The sad account of fore-bemoaned moan,
Lest the wise world should look into your moan,
Revenge upon myself with present moan?
I must attend, time's leisure with my moan;
Which heavily he answers with a groan,
Thy face hath not the power to make love groan;
Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan
How like a winter hath my absence been
Like as, to make our appetite more keen,
Since first I saw you fresh, which yet are green.
And they shall live, and he in them still green.
Making no summer of another's green,
Kissing with golden face the meadows green,
His beauty shall in these black lines be seen,
So are those errors that in thee are seen
In him those holy antique hours are seen,
Full many a glorious morning have I seen
In process of the seasons have I seen,
What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen!
As, to prevent our maladies unseen,
As on the finger of a throned queen
And Death once dead, there's no more dying then.
That looks on tempests and is never shaken;
For if you were by my unkindness shaken,
Of him, myself, and thee I am forsaken;
Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken.
And I, a tyrant, have no leisure taken
Me from myself thy cruel eye hath taken,
Dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken,
Can make you live your self in eyes of men.
Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men.
For beauty's pattern to succeeding men. 
So shall thou feed on Death, that feeds on men,
Exceeded by the height of happier men.
And like unlettered clerk still cry 'Amen'
In polish'd form of well-refined pen.
Nor draw no lines there with thine antique pen;
Which this, Time's pencil, or my pupil pen,
Deserves the travail of a worthier pen;
You still shall live,--such virtue hath my pen,--
And though they be outstripp'd by every pen,
Is it thy will, thy image should keep open
Although in me each part will be forgotten.
Or you survive when I in earth am rotten;
And dost him grace when clouds do blot the heaven:
And truly not the morning sun of heaven 
Nor that full star that ushers in the even,
When sparkling stars twire not thou gild'st the even.
And each, though enemies to either's reign,
All men are bad and in their badness reign.
My tongue-tied patience with too much disdain;
Knowing thy heart torment me with disdain,
When I have seen the hungry ocean gain
If I lose thee, my loss is my love's gain,
Only my plague thus far I count my gain,
He robs thee of, and pays it thee again.
Thou gav'st me thine not to give back again.
Like him that travels, I return again;
The one by toil, the other to complain
Yet do not so; but since I am near slain, 
Presume not on th;heart when mine is slain,
And the firm soil win of the watery main,
By praising him here who doth hence remain.
So shall those blots that do with me remain,
Which shall above that idle rank remain,
That she that makes me sin awards me pain.
The manner of my pity-wanting pain.
Kill me outright with looks, and rid my pain.
Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain.
Those children nursed, deliver'd from thy brain,
Thy gift, thy tables, are within my brain
Unless this general evil they maintain,
Look! what thy memory cannot contain,
So that myself bring water for my stain.
Let me confess that we two must be twain,
And that thou teachest how to make one twain,
Both find each other, and I lose both twain,
That mine eye loves it and doth first begin.
Distill'd from limbecks foul as hell within,
If it be poison'd, 'tis the lesser sin
Still losing when I saw myself to win!
The bloody spur cannot provoke him on,
For never-resting time leads summer on
With shifting change, as is false women's fashion:
Hast thou, the master mistress of my passion;
Potions of eisel 'gainst my strong infection;
Nor double penance, to correct correction.
Now proud as an enjoyer, and anon
So thou, thyself outgoing in thy noon:
On whom frown'st thou that I do fawn upon,
Unlook'd, on diest unless thou get a son.
And when a woman woos, what woman's son
Triumph in love; flesh stays no farther reason,
My nobler part to my gross body's treason;
Gentle thou art, and therefore to be won,
Before these bastard signs of fair were born,
As to behold desert a beggar born,
And place my merit in the eye of scorn,
With lines and wrinkles; when his youthful morn
In act thy bed-vow broke, and new faith torn,
With Time's injurious hand crush'd and o'erworn;
In loving thee thou know'st I am forsworn,
And prove thee virtuous, though thou art forsworn.
And purest faith unhappily forsworn,
Thus is his cheek the map of days outworn,
Nor Mars his sword, nor war's quick fire shall burn
When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun;
Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun,
My mistress' eyes are nothing like the sun;
Even of five hundred courses of the sun,
Are windows to my breast, where-through the sun
But those same tongues, that give thee so thine own,
At my abuses reckon up their own:
Book both my wilfulness and errors down,
By their rank thoughts, my deeds must not be shown;
By seeing farther than the eye hath shown.
Bring me within the level of your frown,
The injuries that to myself I do,
Towards thee I'll run, and give him leave to go.'
I grant I never saw a goddess go,--
That thou among the wastes of time must go,
Love's eye is not so true as all men's: no,
And I by this will be a gainer too;
Though not to love, yet, love to tell me so;--
That every tongue says beauty should look so.
Compar'd with loss of thee, will not seem so.
Mad in pursuit and in possession so;
To one, of one, still such, and ever so.
When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so! 
Die to themselves. Sweet roses do not so;
What means the world to say it is not so?
The hand that writ it, for I love you so,
You had a father: let your son say so.
Love is a babe, then might I not say so,
Do I envy those jacks that nimble leap,
Whilst my poor lips which should that harvest reap,
Whilst many nymphs that vow'd chaste life to keep
When every private widow well may keep
The little Love-god lying once asleep,
Cupid laid by his brand and fell asleep:
And his love-kindling fire did quickly steep
The world will be thy widow and still weep
And my great mind most kingly drinks it up:
And to his palate doth prepare the cup:
Mine eye my heart thy picture's sight would bar,
But when from highmost pitch, with weary car,
By unions married, do offend thine ear,
When your sweet issue your sweet form should bear. 
The humble as the proudest sail doth bear,
These vacant leaves thy mind's imprint will bear,
One on another's neck, do witness bear
In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear. 
Ay me! but yet thou mightst my seat forbear,
For truth proves thievish for a prize so dear.
Gor'd mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear,
And even thence thou wilt be stol'n I fear,
Not making worse what nature made so clear,
As testy sick men, when their deaths be near,
From me far off, with others all too near.
If thy soul check thee that I come so near, 
That leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near.
The other as your bounty doth appear;
I love not less, though less the show appear;
As interest of the dead, which now appear
On your broad main doth wilfully appear.
And this my hand, against my self uprear,
How many a holy and obsequious tear
Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear,
And to be sure that is not false I swear,
Speak of the spring, and foison of the year,
From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year!
Mine eye and heart are at a mortal war,
Or, if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer,
But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer,
And night doth nightly make grief's length seem stronger.
Thou dost love her, because thou know'st I love her;
Suffering my friend for my sake to approve her.
And each doth good turns now unto the other:
Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother.
Resembling sire and child and happy mother,
Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother,
Now is the time that face should form another;
Mark how one string, sweet husband to another,
And heavily from woe to woe tell o'er
Even those that said I could not love you dearer:
My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer.
Grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater.
What's in the brain, that ink may character,
What's new to speak, what now to register,
Thus have I had thee, as a dream doth flatter,
In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.
That better is, by evil still made better;
In the distraction of this madding fever!
Whilst it hath thought itself so blessed never!
When that churl Death my bones with dust shall cover
These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover,
Sweet beauty hath no name, no holy bower,
Whose action is no stronger than a flower?
But sad mortality o'ersways their power,
For since each hand hath put on Nature's power, 
O thou, my lovely boy, who in thy power
As those gold candles fix'd in heaven's air:
A crow that flies in heaven's sweetest air.
In the old age black was not counted fair,
Neither in inward worth nor outward fair,
For slander's mark was ever yet the fair;
Be not self-will'd, for thou art much too fair
And then believe me, my love is as fair
The better angel is a man right fair,
And buds of marjoram had stol'n thy hair;
So should the lines of life that life repair,
Two loves I have of comfort and despair,
One blushing shame, another white despair;
To be death's conquest and make worms thine heir.
But now is black beauty's successive heir,
O! though I love what others do abhor,
Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour,
Dost hold Time's fickle glass, his fickle hour;
Nor think the bitterness of absence sour,
Have I not seen dwellers on form and favour
For compound sweet; forgoing simple savour,
When love, converted from the thing it was,
Nor it, nor no remembrance what it was:
And thence this slander, as I think, proceeds.
That, in my mind, thy worst all best exceeds?
And they are rich and ransom all ill deeds.
The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds,
For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds;
That in the very refuse of thy deeds
In nothing art thou black save in thy deeds,
And that in guess they measure by thy deeds;
Than public means which public manners breeds.
To thy fair flower add the rank smell of weeds: 
Lilies that fester, smell far worse than weeds.
Ah! but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds,
O truant Muse what shall be thy amends
Both truth and beauty on my love depends;
Which alters when it alteration finds,
Let me not to the marriage of true minds
That I have frequent been with unknown minds,
That I have hoisted sail to all the winds
They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds
The wiry concord that mine ear confounds,
If the true concord of well-tuned sounds,
Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds
Three themes in one, which wondrous scope affords.
To every hymn that able spirit affords,
I think good thoughts, whilst others write good words,
'Fair, kind, and true,' varying to other words;
My love looks fresh, and Death to me subscribes,
While he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes:
They are the lords and owners of their faces,
Such heavenly touches ne'er touch'd earthly faces.'
And in fresh numbers number all your graces,
They rightly do inherit heaven's graces,
So all their praises are but prophecies
To find where your true image pictur'd lies,
Making a famine where abundance lies,
And says in him thy fair appearance lies.
I do believe her though I know she lies,
But found no cure, the bath for my help lies
The age to come would say 'This poet lies;
They know what beauty is, see where it lies,
Then being asked, where all thy beauty lies,
Her pretty looks have been mine enemies;
Or on my frailties why are frailer spies,
And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries,
That they elsewhere might dart their injuries:
Unlearned in the world's false subtleties.
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
And every fair from fair sometime declines,
Kill me with spites yet we must not be foes.
And therefore from my face she turns my foes,
When summer's breath their masked buds discloses:
As the perfumed tincture of the roses.
And summer's green all girded up in sheaves,
When lofty trees I see barren of leaves,
Commanded by the motion of thine eyes?
That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes.
In faith I do not love thee with mine eyes, 
Thou blind fool, Love, what dost thou to mine eyes,
For why should others' false adulterate eyes
And for they looked but with divining eyes,
A closet never pierc'd with crystal eyes--
To say, within thine own deep sunken eyes,
There lives more life in one of your fair eyes
If I could write the beauty of your eyes,
When in disgrace with fortune and men's eyes
You live in this, and dwell in lovers' eyes.
Where Cupid got new fire; my mistress' eyes.
But thou contracted to thine own bright eyes,
Divert strong minds to the course of altering things;
Creep in 'twixt vows, and change decrees of kings,
That then I scorn to change my state with kings.
For thy sweet love remember'd such wealth brings
I see a better state to me belongs
Then need I not to fear the worst of wrongs,
Love is too young to know what conscience is, 
If there be nothing new, but that which is
But since your worth--wide as the ocean is,--
Why should he live, now Nature bankrupt is,
My name be buried where my body is,
My saucy bark, inferior far to his,
For she hath no exchequer now but his,
Since saucy jacks so happy are in this,
O! lest your true love may seem false in this
All men make faults, and even I in this,
Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks
But no such roses see I in her cheeks;
Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks.
Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,
Why of eyes' falsehood hast thou forged hooks,
If eyes, corrupt by over-partial looks, 
Whereto th' inviting time our fashion calls:
It suffers not in smiling pomp, nor falls
Sweet thief, whence didst thou steal thy sweet that smells,
Which on thy soft cheek for complexion dwells
With sun and moon, with earth and sea's rich gems,
That heaven's air in this huge rondure hems.
And proud of many, lives upon his gains.
And that is this, and this with thee remains.
The worth of that is that which it contains,
Beggar'd of blood to blush through lively veins?
And situation with those dancing chips,
Making dead wood more bless'd than living lips.
Whilst I, whom fortune of such triumph bars
Applying fears to hopes, and hopes to fears,
The sun itself sees not, till heaven clears.
That is so vexed with watching and with tears?
What potions have I drunk of Siren tears,
Let those who are in favour with their stars
That it nor grows with heat, nor drowns with showers.
With virtuous wish would bear you living flowers,
Which works on leases of short-number'd hours,
Now stand you on the top of happy hours,
A liquid prisoner pent in walls of glass,
Against that time when thou shalt strangely pass,
Shall worms, inheritors of this excess,
Both grace and faults are lov'd of more and less:
For I have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness,
And, to enlighten thee, gave eyes to blindness,
The spirit of love, with a perpetual dulness.
Thy hungry eyes, even till they wink with fulness,
Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonness;
And, sick of welfare, found a kind of meetness
Even so, being full of your ne'er-cloying sweetness,
Be wise as thou art cruel; do not press
Lest sorrow lend me words, and words express
Give them thy fingers, me thy lips to kiss.
Which labouring for invention bear amiss
Myself corrupting, salving thy amiss,
Then, gentle cheater, urge not my amiss,
Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss:
Then soul, live thou upon thy servant's loss,
And losing her, my friend hath found that loss;
And do not drop in for an after-loss:
Now, while the world is bent my deeds to cross,
To him that bears the strong offence's cross. 
And both for my sake lay on me this cross:
Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross;
When I shall see thee frown on my defects,
Call'd to that audit by advis'd respects;
Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleets,
To the wide world and all her fading sweets;
In praise of ladies dead and lovely knights,
I see descriptions of the fairest wights,
The humble salve, which wounded bosoms fits!
Thy beauty, and thy years full well befits,
My deepest sense, how hard true sorrow hits,
That on himself such murd'rous shame commits.
Those pretty wrongs that liberty commits,
No love toward others in that bosom sits
But reckoning Time, whose million'd accidents
That have profan'd their scarlet ornaments
Not marble, nor the gilded monuments
Robb'd others' beds' revenues of their rents.
Tan sacred beauty, blunt the sharp'st intents,
But you shall shine more bright in these contents
Thy bosom is endeared with all hearts,
And there reigns Love, and all Love's loving parts,
Which hides your life, and shows not half your parts. 
If it were fill'd with your most high deserts?
Richer than wealth, prouder than garments' costs,
To thy sweet will making addition thus.
And 'Will' to boot, and 'Will' in over-plus;
Wilt thou, whose will is large and spacious,
Shall will in others seem right gracious,
Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger's jaws,
To leave poor me thou hast the strength of laws,
Devouring Time, blunt thou the lion's paws,
Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows,
That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows
Let me excuse thee: ah! my love well knows
When I consider every thing that grows
Root pity in thy heart, that, when it grows,
Nor gates of steel so strong but Time decays?
Against the wrackful siege of battering days,
Some fresher stamp of the time-bettering days.
Thou hast passed by the ambush of young days
O! sure I am the wits of former days,
And stops her pipe in growth of riper days:
If my slight muse do please these curious days,
For we, which now behold these present days,
That tongue that tells the story of thy days,
Painting my age with beauty of thy days.
Where all the treasure of thy lusty days; 
When I was wont to greet it with my lays;
Mine own true love that doth my rest defeat,
O, no! thy love, though much, is not so great:
Or, being wrack'd, I am a worthless boat,
Your shallowest help will hold me up afloat,
That barren tender of a poet's debt:
Yet this shall I ne'er know, but live in doubt, 
That thou art blam'd shall not be thy defect,
When all my best doth worship thy defect,
Which though it alter not love's sole effect,
Me for my dumb thoughts, speaking in effect.
Points on me graciously with fair aspect,
In our two loves there is but one respect,
What merit do I in my self respect,
Then others, for the breath of words respect,
To show me worthy of thy sweet respect:
The ornament of beauty is suspect,
But if that flower with base infection meet,
But flowers distill'd, though they with winter meet,
And taught it thus anew to greet;
The summer's flower is to the summer sweet,
Chiding that tongue that ever sweet
Leese but their show; their substance still lives sweet.
Or captain jewels in the carcanet.
And therefore to your fair no painting set;
Since, seldom coming in that long year set,
On Helen's cheek all art of beauty set,
And many maiden gardens, yet unset,
Then were not summer's distillation left,
Beauty's effect with beauty were bereft,
Enjoy'd no sooner but despised straight;
Upon thy side, against myself I'll fight,
The painful warrior famoused for fight,
Crooked eclipses 'gainst his glory fight,
When thou shalt be dispos'd to set me light,
Nativity, once in the main of light,
When thou thy self dost give invention light? 
To the clear day with thy much clearer light,
Darkening thy power to lend base subjects light?
Lo! in the orient when the gracious light
And in some perfumes is there more delight
They were but sweet, but figures of delight,
Possessing or pursuing no delight,
And sweets grown common lose their dear delight.
As a decrepit father takes delight
Yet doth it steal sweet hours from love's delight.
Awakes my heart, to heart's and eye's delight.
How can I then return in happy plight,
O! none, unless this miracle have might,
O! from what power hast thou this powerful might,
To-morrow sharpened in his former might:
Thy pyramids built up with newer might
At first the very worst of fortune's might;
O'ercharg'd with burthen of mine own love's might. 
And in the praise thereof spends all his might,
To speak of that which gives thee all thy might?
What need'st thou wound with cunning, when thy might
To change your day of youth to sullied night,
So flatter I the swart-complexion'd night,
Than when her mournful hymns did hush the night,
The mountain or the sea, the day or night:
Who art as black as hell, as dark as night.
For precious friends hid in death's dateless night,
And see the brave day sunk in hideous night;
When day's oppression is not eas'd by night,
No, neither he, nor his compeers by night
Which, like a jewel (hung in ghastly night,
Hath travell'd on to age's steepy night;
My heavy eyelids to the weary night?
And given to time your own dear-purchas'd right;
My heart mine eye the freedom of that right.
That censures falsely what they see aright?
For I have sworn thee fair, and thought thee bright,
Then thou, whose shadow shadows doth make bright,
That in black ink my love may still shine bright.
As any mother's child, though not so bright
I tell the day, to please him thou art bright,
And moan the expense of many a vanish'd sight:
Which have no correspondence with true sight;
To make me give the lie to my true sight,
Are vanishing, or vanished out of sight,
Doth homage to his new-appearing sight,
They are but dressings of a former sight.
Which should transport me farthest from your sight.
Sometime all full with feasting on your sight,
For if it see the rud'st or gentlest sight,
How to divide the conquest of thy sight;
Worthy perusal stand against thy sight;
Sets you most rich in youth before my sight,
While shadows like to thee do mock my sight?
Or, if they sleep, thy picture in my sight
Tell me thou lov'st elsewhere; but in my sight,
Save that my soul's imaginary sight
If the dull substance of my flesh were thought,
O! then vouchsafe me but this loving thought:
Nor dare I question with my jealous thought
When to the sessions of sweet silent thought
But, ah! thought kills me that I am not thought,
But, like a sad slave, stay and think of nought
A dearer birth than this his love had brought,
For then despite of space I would be brought,
But that so much of earth and water wrought,
I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought,
Your own glass shows you when you look in it.
Shifts but his place, for still the world enjoys it;
And kept unused the user so destroys it.
May make seem bare, in wanting words to show it,
In thy soul's thought, all naked, will bestow it:
Past reason hated, as a swallow'd bait,
O'er whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait,
Much liker than your painted counterfeit:
Describe Adonis, and the counterfeit
Thy merit hath my duty strongly knit,
That may express my love, or thy dear merit?
Which hath not figur'd to thee my true spirit?
O! learn to read what silent love hath writ:
Let him but copy what in you is writ,
Entitled in thy parts, do crowned sit,
And more, much more, than in my verse can sit,
But hope of orphans, and unfather'd fruit;
To hear with eyes belongs to love's fine wit.
For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit,
And such a counterpart shall fame his wit,
To witness duty, not to show my wit:
Speak of my lameness, and I straight will halt,
Say that thou didst forsake me for some fault,
Cries to catch her whose busy care is bent
No, it was builded far from accident;
But that thou none lov'st is most evident:
Who for thy self art so unprovident.
Thine own sweet argument, too excellent
Thou that art now the world's fresh ornament,
Whereon the stars in secret influence comment;
Holds in perfection but a little moment,
And gives thy pen both skill and argument.
I grant, sweet love, thy lovely argument
'Fair, kind, and true,' is all my argument,
And you and love are still my argument;
And thou in this shalt find thy monument,
When tyrants' crests and tombs of brass are spent.
And gain by ill thrice more than I have spent.
Pitiful thrivers, in their gazing spent?
And in this change is my invention spent,
Spending again what is already spent:
In gentle numbers time so idly spent;
Lose all and more by paying too much rent
Within thine own bud buriest thy content,
So I return rebuk'd to my content,
Under the blow of thralled discontent,
Not prizing her poor infant's discontent;
Yet what of thee thy poet doth invent
How can my muse want subject to invent,
No shape so true, no truth of such account;
As I all other in all worths surmount.
O! what a mansion have those vices got
That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot,
Do I not think on thee, when I forgot
But what's so blessed-fair that fears no blot?
Where beauty's veil doth cover every blot
Why should my heart think that a several plot,
Canst thou, O cruel! say I love thee not,
Nay, if you read this line, remember not
Or mine eyes, seeing this, say this is not,
Thou mayst be false, and yet I know it not.
Desire is death, which physic did except.
Angry that his prescriptions are not kept,
And constant stars in them I read such art
Which is not mix'd with seconds, knows no art,
Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art,
And perspective it is best painter's art.
For still temptation follows where thou art.
Save where thou art not, though I feel thou art,
How can I then be elder than thou art?
Ten times thy self were happier than thou art,
Thou art as tyrannous, so as thou art, 
Use power with power, and slay me not by art,
Or, at the least, so long as brain and heart
For it no form delivers to the heart
A quest of thoughts, all tenants to the heart;
They draw but what they see, know not the heart.
O! never say that I was false of heart,
And my heart's right, thy inward love of heart.
For well thou know'st to my dear doting heart
Whose strength's abundance weakens his own heart;
But you like none, none you, for constant heart.
O! let it then as well beseem thy heart
When I am sometime absent from thy heart,
No; let me be obsequious in thy heart,
Thy beauty's form in table of my heart;
Is but the seemly raiment of my heart,
It is so grounded inward in my heart.
That thy unkindness lays upon my heart;
And to the painted banquet bids my heart;
And in his thoughts of love doth share a part:
From whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part;
As thus; mine eye's due is thy outward part,
In all external grace you have some part,
Of his quick objects hath the mind no part, 
Till each to raz'd oblivion yield his part
Who with his fear is put beside his part,
The clear eye's moiety, and the dear heart's part:
To guard the lawful reasons on thy part: 
And suit thy pity like in every part.
And all my soul, and all my every part;
As easy might I from my self depart
Then what could death do if thou shouldst depart,
Than niggard truth would willingly impart:
Within the knowledge of mine own desert,
To do more for me than mine own desert,
If from thyself, to store thou wouldst convert'; 
How far a modern quill doth come too short,
As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report.
As thou being mine, mine is thy good report.
Naming thy name, blesses an ill report.
And therefore have I slept in your report,
Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport;
Making lascivious comments on thy sport,
But do not so, I love thee in such sort,
But do not so; I love thee in such sort,
Thou mak'st faults graces that to thee resort.
Better becomes the grey cheeks of the east,
With my love's picture then my eye doth feast,
With what I most enjoy contented least;
And dumb presagers of my speaking breast,
Even to thy pure and most most loving breast.
Within the gentle closure of my breast,
The boy for trial needs would touch my breast;
If thou wilt leave me, do not leave me last,
And having thee, of all men's pride I boast:
Of public honour and proud titles boast,
As victors of my silence cannot boast;
Not wondering at the present nor the past,
I summon up remembrance of things past,
Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best,
Although she knows my days are past the best,
All these I better in one general best.
Then, in the blazon of sweet beauty's best,
Creating every bad a perfect best,
Might I not then say, 'Now I love you best,'
To make of monsters and things indigest
So is the time that keeps you as my chest,
Thee have I not lock'd up in any chest,
To make some special instant special-blest,
Wherein it finds a joy above the rest:
Crowning the present, doubting of the rest?
That am debarre'd the benefit of rest?
Death's second self, that seals up all in rest. 
My life hath in this line some interest,
And frantic-mad with evermore unrest;
But be contented: when that fell arrest
I cannot blame thee, for my love thou usest;
By wilful taste of what thyself refusest.
In one of thine, from that which thou departest;
Thou mayst call thine when thou from youth convertest,
And thither hied, a sad distemper'd guest,
Another time mine eye is my heart's guest,
But yet be blam'd, if thou thy self deceivest
Then, if for my love, thou my love receivest,
As after sunset fadeth in the west;
Doth half that glory to the sober west,
Look in thy glass and tell the face thou viewest
Whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest,
Have faculty by nature to subsist;
He, nor that affable familiar ghost
And all my honest faith in thee is lost:
When I break twenty? I am perjur'd most;
Unlook'd for joy in that I honour most.
But wherefore says she not she is unjust? 
Is lust in action: and till action, lust
Each trifle under truest bars to thrust,
From hands of falsehood, in sure wards of trust!
O! love's best habit is in seeming trust,
Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust;
Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow'st,
Who hast by waning grown, and therein show'st
Thy lovers withering, as thy sweet self grow'st.
When in eternal lines to time thou grow'st,
As fast as thou shalt wane, so fast thou grow'st,
And that fresh blood which youngly thou bestow'st,
How oft when thou, my music, music play'st,
With thy sweet fingers when thou gently sway'st
O! how shall summer's honey breath hold out,
Till my bad angel fire my good one out.
Seems seeing, but effectually is out;
And that which governs me to go about
When rocks impregnable are not so stout,
When you have bid your servant once adieu;
Than this rich praise,--that you alone, are you?
O! know sweet love I always write of you,
And all in war with Time for love of you,
Drugs poison him that so fell sick of you.
Or whether doth my mind, being crown'd with you,
Incapable of more, replete with you,
But that is in my thought, whose love to you,
Is poorly imitated after you;
Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you,
And live no more to shame nor me nor you.
Bound for the prize of all too precious you,
And sav'd my life, saying 'not you'.
Return of love, more blest may be the view;
And made my self a motley to the view,
Those parts of thee that the world's eye doth view
Presents thy shadow to my sightless view,
No marvel then, though I mistake my view;
When thou reviewest this, thou dost review
Which parts the shore, where two contracted new
And you in Grecian tires are painted new: 
May still seem love to me, though alter'd new;
Makes black night beauteous, and her old face new.
So all my best is dressing old words new,
Made old offences of affections new;
As he takes from you, I engraft you new.
Robbing no old to dress his beauty new;
And therefore art enforced to seek anew
And ruin'd love, when it is built anew,
Which should example where your equal grew.
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew: 
Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew?
'I hate', from hate away she threw,
Join with the spite of fortune, make me bow,
Needs must I under my transgression bow,
Then do thy office, Muse; I teach thee how
Nor my beloved as an idol show,
That do not do the thing they most do show,
But, for their virtue only is their show,
That you yourself, being extant, well might show
If some suspect of ill mask'd not thy show,
But why thy odour matcheth not thy show,
If thy sweet virtue answer not thy show!
The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show
How would thy shadow's form form happy show
The one doth shadow of your beauty show,
Then can I drown an eye, unused to flow,
So you o'er-green my bad, my good allow?
Him in thy course untainted do allow
Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow;
Receiving nought by elements so slow
When swift extremity can seem but slow?
'Since from thee going, he went wilful-slow,
And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow:
The region cloud hath mask'd him from me now.
That you were once unkind befriends me now,
Against my love shall be as I am now,
Thy youth's proud livery so gazed on now,
When beauty lived and died as flowers do now,
Even such a beauty as you master now.
Then hate me when thou wilt; if ever, now;
To make him seem long hence as he shows now.
Not that the summer is less pleasant now
As if by some instinct the wretch did know
And you in every blessed shape we know.
In winged speed n:motion shall I know,
I love to hear her speak, yet well I know
No news but health from their physicians know;--
Thou by thy dial's shady stealth mayst know
O! none but unthrifts. Dear my love, you know,
Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow,
Or durst inhabit on a living brow;
O! carve not with thy hours my love's fair brow,
When hours have drain'd his blood and fill'd his brow
And delves the parallels in beauty's brow,
When forty winters shall besiege thy brow,
With all triumphant splendour on my brow;
Which vulgar scandal stamp'd upon my brow;
To give full growth to that which still doth grow?
Speaking of worth, what worth in you doth grow. 
The soil is this, that thou dost common grow.
And die as fast as they see others grow;
How like Eve's apple doth thy beauty grow,
To linger out a purpos'd overthrow.
Give not a windy night a rainy morrow,
Ah! do not, when my heart hath 'scap'd this sorrow,
Without this folly, age, and cold decay:
But let your love even with my life decay;
Where wasteful Time debateth with decay
Or state itself confounded, to decay;
If any, be a satire to decay,
Who lets so fair a house fall to decay,
And in mine own love's strength seem to decay,
And fortify your self in your decay
The worst was this,--my love was my decay.
If thou survive my well-contented day,
And swear that brightness doth not grace the day?
Like feeble age, he reeleth from the day,
That followed it as gentle day,
By looking on thee in the living day,
In me thou see'st the twilight of such day
Shall I compare thee to a summer's day?
Against the stormy gusts of winter's day
Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day,
Whereto all bonds do tie me day by day;
Thus do I pine and surfeit day by day,
Ere beauty's dead fleece made another gay: 
Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?
Beauty no pencil, beauty's truth to lay;
When I perhaps compounded am with clay,
As with your shadow I with these did play.
My soul doth tell my body that he may
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
Since what he owes thee, thou thyself dost pay.
Wherein I should your great deserts repay,
My sinful earth these rebel powers array,
How many lambs might the stern wolf betray,
For, thou betraying me, I do betray
That I might see what the old world could say
Then thank him not for that which he doth say,
Doth teach that ease and that repose to say,
So I, for fear of trust, forget to say
Make answer Muse: wilt thou not haply say,
That to my use it might unused stay
In pursuit of the thing she would have stay;
Through heavy sleep on sightless eyes doth stay!
Which for memorial still with thee shall stay.
And life no longer than thy love will stay,
Then the conceit of this inconstant stay
From limits far remote, where thou dost stay.
How heavy do I journey on the way,
From his low tract, and look another way:
But wherefore do not you a mightier way
How careful was I when I took my way,
To let base clouds o'ertake me in my way,
Injurious distance should not stop my way;
How many gazers mightst thou lead away,
And threescore year would make the world away.
Which by and by black night doth take away,
One of her feather'd creatures broke away,
Without all bail shall carry me away,
That Time will come and take my love away. 
But do thy worst to steal thyself away,
Or gluttoning on all, or all away.
The right of sepulchres, were shorn away,
From heaven to hell is flown away.
Then if he thrive and I be cast away,
Yet seem'd it winter still, and you away,
With insufficiency my heart to sway?
Consum'd with that which it was nourish'd by.
This brand she quenched in a cool well by,
She carv'd thee for her seal, and meant thereby,
Upon thy self thy beauty's legacy?
Oaths of thy love, thy truth, thy constancy;
Growing a bath and healthful remedy,
And for this sin there is no remedy,
Wh'r we are mended, or wh'r better they,
So am I as the rich, whose blessed key,
Rise, resty Muse, my love's sweet face survey,
The which he will not every hour survey,
And shalt by fortune once more re-survey
Thy registers and thee I both defy,
Though absence seem'd my flame to qualify,
For such a time do I now fortify
Yet then my judgment knew no reason why
Cheered and checked even by the self-same sky,
Why lov'st thou that which thou receiv'st not gladly,
Music to hear, why hear'st thou music sadly?
And heavy ignorance aloft to fly,
Hang on such thorns, and play as wantonly
Sinks down to death, oppress'd with melancholy;
And yet it may be said I loved her dearly;
A loss in love that touches me more nearly. 
And that your love taught it this alchemy,
Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy;
And yet methinks I have astronomy,
For shame! deny that thou bear'st love to any,
Grant, if thou wilt, thou art belov'd of many,
But the defendant doth that plea deny,
Alas! why fearing of Time's tyranny,
Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy:
Or else receiv'st with pleasure thine annoy?
Were't aught to me I bore the canopy,
Bearing thy heart, which I will keep so chary
O! therefore love, be of thyself so wary
Tired with all these, for restful death I cry,
Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry?
Drink up the monarch's plague, this flattery?
And broils root out the work of masonry,
That thou in losing me shalt win much glory: 
That to his subject lends not some small glory;
Of mouthed graves will give thee memory;
And wear their brave state out of memory;
Full character'd with lasting memory,
That he shall never cut from memory
The living record of your memory.
His tender heir might bear his memory:
Upon thy part I can set down a story
That you are you, so dignifies his story,
In many's looks, the false heart's history
So far from home into my deeds to pry,
Let not my love be call'd idolatry,
Without accusing you of injury. 
To bear love's wrong, than hate's known injury.
That use is not forbidden usury,
The scope and tenure of thy jealousy?
And lace itself with his society? 
And with his presence grace impiety,
And simple truth miscall'd simplicity,
Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons' quality;
And needy nothing trimm'd in jollity,
'Gainst death, and all-oblivious enmity
The basest weed outbraves his dignity: 
Beyond all date; even to eternity:
Time's thievish progress to eternity.
Or laid great bases for eternity,
Even in the eyes of all posterity
Leaving thee living in posterity?
Of his self-love to stop posterity? 
And art made tongue-tied by authority,
Self so self-loving were iniquity.
Beated and chopp'd with tanned antiquity,
Shall reasons find of settled gravity;
When I was certain o'er incertainty,
The imprison'd absence of your liberty;
Although thou steal thee all my poverty:
Serving with looks his sacred majesty; 
And given grace a double majesty.
